Thy bosom is endeared with all hearts,	1
Which I by lacking have supposed dead,	1
And there reigns love and all love's loving parts,	1
And all those friends which I thought buried.	1
How many a holy and obsequious tear	1
Hath dear religious love stol'n from mine eye	1
As interest of the dead, which now appear	1
But things removed that hidden in thee lie!	1
Thou art the grave where buried love doth live,	1
Hung with the trophies of my lovers gone,	1
Who all their parts of me to thee did give;	1
That due of many now is thine alone:	1
Their images I loved I view in thee,	1
And thou, all they, hast all the all of me.	1

If thou survive my well-contented day,	1
When that churl Death my bones with dust shall cover,	1
And shalt by fortune once more re-survey	1
These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover,	1
Compare them with the bettering of the time,	1
And though they be outstripp'd by every pen,	1
Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme,	1
Exceeded by the height of happier men.	1
O, then vouchsafe me but this loving thought:	1
'Had my friend's Muse grown with this growing age,	1
A dearer birth than this his love had brought,	1
To march in ranks of better equipage:	1
But since he died and poets better prove,	1
Theirs for their style I'll read, his for his love.'	1

Full many a glorious morning have I seen	1
Flatter the mountain-tops with sovereign eye,	1
Kissing with golden face the meadows green,	1
Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy;	1
Anon permit the basest clouds to ride	1
With ugly rack on his celestial face,	1
And from the forlorn world his visage hide,	1
Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace:	1
Even so my sun one early morn did shine	1
With all triumphant splendor on my brow;	1
But out, alack! he was but one hour mine;	1
The region cloud hath mask'd him from me now.	1
Yet him for this my love no whit disdaineth;	1
Suns of the world may stain when heaven's sun staineth.	1

Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day,	1
And make me travel forth without my cloak,	1
To let base clouds o'ertake me in my way,	1
Hiding thy bravery in their rotten smoke?	1
'Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break,	1
To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face,	1
For no man well of such a salve can speak	1
That heals the wound and cures not the disgrace:	1
Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief;	1
Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss:	1
The offender's sorrow lends but weak relief	1
To him that bears the strong offence's cross.	1
Ah! but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds,	1
And they are rich and ransom all ill deeds.	1

No more be grieved at that which thou hast done:	1
Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud;	1
Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun,	1
And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud.	1
All men make faults, and even I in this,	1
Authorizing thy trespass with compare,	1
Myself corrupting, salving thy amiss,	1
Excusing thy sins more than thy sins are;	1
For to thy sensual fault I bring in sense--	1
Thy adverse party is thy advocate--	1
And 'gainst myself a lawful plea commence:	1
Such civil war is in my love and hate	1
That I an accessary needs must be	1
To that sweet thief which sourly robs from me.	1

Let me confess that we two must be twain,	1
Although our undivided loves are one:	1
So shall those blots that do with me remain	1
Without thy help by me be borne alone.	1
In our two loves there is but one respect,	1
Though in our lives a separable spite,	1
Which though it alter not love's sole effect,	1
Yet doth it steal sweet hours from love's delight.	1
I may not evermore acknowledge thee,	1
Lest my bewailed guilt should do thee shame,	1
Nor thou with public kindness honour me,	1
Unless thou take that honour from thy name:	1
But do not so; I love thee in such sort	1
As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report.	1

As a decrepit father takes delight	1
To see his active child do deeds of youth,	1
So I, made lame by fortune's dearest spite,	1
Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth.	1
For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit,	1
Or any of these all, or all, or more,	1
Entitled in thy parts do crowned sit,	1
I make my love engrafted to this store:	1
So then I am not lame, poor, nor despised,	1
Whilst that this shadow doth such substance give	1
That I in thy abundance am sufficed	1
And by a part of all thy glory live.	1
Look, what is best, that best I wish in thee:	1
This wish I have; then ten times happy me!	1

How can my Muse want subject to invent,	1
While thou dost breathe, that pour'st into my verse	1
Thine own sweet argument, too excellent	1
For every vulgar paper to rehearse?	1
O, give thyself the thanks, if aught in me	1
Worthy perusal stand against thy sight;	1
For who's so dumb that cannot write to thee,	1
When thou thyself dost give invention light?	1
Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth	1
Than those old nine which rhymers invocate;	1
And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth	1
Eternal numbers to outlive long date.	1
If my slight Muse do please these curious days,	1
The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise.	1

O, how thy worth with manners may I sing,	1
When thou art all the better part of me?	1
What can mine own praise to mine own self bring?	1
And what is 't but mine own when I praise thee?	1
Even for this let us divided live,	1
And our dear love lose name of single one,	1
That by this separation I may give	1
That due to thee which thou deservest alone.	1
O absence, what a torment wouldst thou prove,	1
Were it not thy sour leisure gave sweet leave	1
To entertain the time with thoughts of love,	1
Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive,	1
And that thou teachest how to make one twain,	1
By praising him here who doth hence remain!	1

Take all my loves, my love, yea, take them all;	1
What hast thou then more than thou hadst before?	1
No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call;	1
All mine was thine before thou hadst this more.	1
Then if for my love thou my love receivest,	1
I cannot blame thee for my love thou usest;	1
But yet be blamed, if thou thyself deceivest	1
By wilful taste of what thyself refusest.	1
I do forgive thy robbery, gentle thief,	1
Although thou steal thee all my poverty;	1
And yet, love knows, it is a greater grief	1
To bear love's wrong than hate's known injury.	1
Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows,	1
Kill me with spites; yet we must not be foes.	1

Those petty wrongs that liberty commits,	1
When I am sometime absent from thy heart,	1
Thy beauty and thy years full well befits,	1
For still temptation follows where thou art.	1
Gentle thou art and therefore to be won,	1
Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assailed;	1
And when a woman woos, what woman's son	1
Will sourly leave her till she have prevailed?	1
Ay me! but yet thou mightest my seat forbear,	1
And chide try beauty and thy straying youth,	1
Who lead thee in their riot even there	1
Where thou art forced to break a twofold truth,	1
Hers by thy beauty tempting her to thee,	1
Thine, by thy beauty being false to me.	1

That thou hast her, it is not all my grief,	1
And yet it may be said I loved her dearly;	1
That she hath thee, is of my wailing chief,	1
A loss in love that touches me more nearly.	1
Loving offenders, thus I will excuse ye:	1
Thou dost love her, because thou knowst I love her;	1
And for my sake even so doth she abuse me,	1
Suffering my friend for my sake to approve her.	1
If I lose thee, my loss is my love's gain,	1
And losing her, my friend hath found that loss;	1
Both find each other, and I lose both twain,	1
And both for my sake lay on me this cross:	1
But here's the joy; my friend and I are one;	1
Sweet flattery! then she loves but me alone.	1

When most I wink, then do mine eyes best see,	1
For all the day they view things unrespected;	1
But when I sleep, in dreams they look on thee,	1
And darkly bright are bright in dark directed.	1
Then thou, whose shadow shadows doth make bright,	1
How would thy shadow's form form happy show	1
To the clear day with thy much clearer light,	1
When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so!	1
How would, I say, mine eyes be blessed made	1
By looking on thee in the living day,	1
When in dead night thy fair imperfect shade	1
Through heavy sleep on sightless eyes doth stay!	1
All days are nights to see till I see thee,	1
And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me.	1

If the dull substance of my flesh were thought,	1
Injurious distance should not stop my way;	1
For then despite of space I would be brought,	1
From limits far remote where thou dost stay.	1
No matter then although my foot did stand	1
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee;	1
For nimble thought can jump both sea and land	1
As soon as think the place where he would be.	1
But ah! thought kills me that I am not thought,	1
To leap large lengths of miles when thou art gone,	1
But that so much of earth and water wrought	1
I must attend time's leisure with my moan,	1
Receiving nought by elements so slow	1
But heavy tears, badges of either's woe.	1

The other two, slight air and purging fire,	1
Are both with thee, wherever I abide;	1
The first my thought, the other my desire,	1
These present-absent with swift motion slide.	1
For when these quicker elements are gone	1
In tender embassy of love to thee,	1
My life, being made of four, with two alone	1
Sinks down to death, oppress'd with melancholy;	1
Until life's composition be recured	1
By those swift messengers return'd from thee,	1
Who even but now come back again, assured	1
Of thy fair health, recounting it to me:	1
This told, I joy; but then no longer glad,	1
I send them back again and straight grow sad.	1

Mine eye and heart are at a mortal war	1
How to divide the conquest of thy sight;	1
Mine eye my heart thy picture's sight would bar,	1
My heart mine eye the freedom of that right.	1
My heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie--	1
A closet never pierced with crystal eyes--	1
But the defendant doth that plea deny	1
And says in him thy fair appearance lies.	1
To 'cide this title is impanneled	1
A quest of thoughts, all tenants to the heart,	1
And by their verdict is determined	1
The clear eye's moiety and the dear heart's part:	1
As thus; mine eye's due is thy outward part,	1
And my heart's right thy inward love of heart.	1

Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is took,	1
And each doth good turns now unto the other:	1
When that mine eye is famish'd for a look,	1
Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother,	1
With my love's picture then my eye doth feast	1
And to the painted banquet bids my heart;	1
Another time mine eye is my heart's guest	1
And in his thoughts of love doth share a part:	1
So, either by thy picture or my love,	1
Thyself away art resent still with me;	1
For thou not farther than my thoughts canst move,	1
And I am still with them and they with thee;	1
Or, if they sleep, thy picture in my sight	1
Awakes my heart to heart's and eye's delight.	1

How careful was I, when I took my way,	1
Each trifle under truest bars to thrust,	1
That to my use it might unused stay	1
From hands of falsehood, in sure wards of trust!	1
But thou, to whom my jewels trifles are,	1
Most worthy of comfort, now my greatest grief,	1
Thou, best of dearest and mine only care,	1
Art left the prey of every vulgar thief.	1
Thee have I not lock'd up in any chest,	1
Save where thou art not, though I feel thou art,	1
Within the gentle closure of my breast,	1
From whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part;	1
And even thence thou wilt be stol'n, I fear,	1
For truth proves thievish for a prize so dear.	1

Against that time, if ever that time come,	1
When I shall see thee frown on my defects,	1
When as thy love hath cast his utmost sum,	1
Call'd to that audit by advised respects;	1
Against that time when thou shalt strangely pass	1
And scarcely greet me with that sun thine eye,	1
When love, converted from the thing it was,	1
Shall reasons find of settled gravity,--	1
Against that time do I ensconce me here	1
Within the knowledge of mine own desert,	1
And this my hand against myself uprear,	1
To guard the lawful reasons on thy part:	1
To leave poor me thou hast the strength of laws,	1
Since why to love I can allege no cause.	1

How heavy do I journey on the way,	1
When what I seek, my weary travel's end,	1
Doth teach that ease and that repose to say	1
'Thus far the miles are measured from thy friend!'	1
The beast that bears me, tired with my woe,	1
Plods dully on, to bear that weight in me,	1
As if by some instinct the wretch did know	1
His rider loved not speed, being made from thee:	1
The bloody spur cannot provoke him on	1
That sometimes anger thrusts into his hide;	1
Which heavily he answers with a groan,	1
More sharp to me than spurring to his side;	1
For that same groan doth put this in my mind;	1
My grief lies onward and my joy behind.	1

Thus can my love excuse the slow offence	1
Of my dull bearer when from thee I speed:	1
From where thou art why should I haste me thence?	1
Till I return, of posting is no need.	1
O, what excuse will my poor beast then find,	1
When swift extremity can seem but slow?	1
Then should I spur, though mounted on the wind;	1
In winged speed no motion shall I know:	1
Then can no horse with my desire keep pace;	1
Therefore desire of perfect'st love being made,	1
Shall neigh--no dull flesh--in his fiery race;	1
But love, for love, thus shall excuse my jade;	1
Since from thee going he went wilful-slow,	1
Towards thee I'll run, and give him leave to go.	1

So am I as the rich, whose blessed key	1
Can bring him to his sweet up-locked treasure,	1
The which he will not every hour survey,	1
For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure.	1
Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare,	1
Since, seldom coming, in the long year set,	1
Like stones of worth they thinly placed are,	1
Or captain jewels in the carcanet.	1
So is the time that keeps you as my chest,	1
Or as the wardrobe which the robe doth hide,	1
To make some special instant special blest,	1
By new unfolding his imprison'd pride.	1
Blessed are you, whose worthiness gives scope,	1
Being had, to triumph, being lack'd, to hope.	1

What is your substance, whereof are you made,	1
That millions of strange shadows on you tend?	1
Since every one hath, every one, one shade,	1
And you, but one, can every shadow lend.	1
Describe Adonis, and the counterfeit	1
Is poorly imitated after you;	1
On Helen's cheek all art of beauty set,	1
And you in Grecian tires are painted new:	1
Speak of the spring and foison of the year;	1
The one doth shadow of your beauty show,	1
The other as your bounty doth appear;	1
And you in every blessed shape we know.	1
In all external grace you have some part,	1
But you like none, none you, for constant heart.	1

O, how much more doth beauty beauteous seem	1
By that sweet ornament which truth doth give!	1
The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem	1
For that sweet odour which doth in it live.	1
The canker-blooms have full as deep a dye	1
As the perfumed tincture of the roses,	1
Hang on such thorns and play as wantonly	1
When summer's breath their masked buds discloses:	1
But, for their virtue only is their show,	1
They live unwoo'd and unrespected fade,	1
Die to themselves. Sweet roses do not so;	1
Of their sweet deaths are sweetest odours made:	1
And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth,	1
When that shall fade, my verse distills your truth.	1

Not marble, nor the gilded monuments	1
Of princes, shall outlive this powerful rhyme;	1
But you shall shine more bright in these contents	1
Than unswept stone besmear'd with sluttish time.	1
When wasteful war shall statues overturn,	1
And broils root out the work of masonry,	1
Nor Mars his sword nor war's quick fire shall burn	1
The living record of your memory.	1
'Gainst death and all-oblivious enmity	1
Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room	1
Even in the eyes of all posterity	1
That wear this world out to the ending doom.	1
So, till the judgment that yourself arise,	1
You live in this, and dwell in lover's eyes.	1

Sweet love, renew thy force; be it not said	1
Thy edge should blunter be than appetite,	1
Which but to-day by feeding is allay'd,	1
To-morrow sharpen'd in his former might:	1
So, love, be thou; although to-day thou fill	1
Thy hungry eyes even till they wink with fullness,	1
To-morrow see again, and do not kill	1
The spirit of love with a perpetual dullness.	1
Let this sad interim like the ocean be	1
Which parts the shore, where two contracted new	1
Come daily to the banks, that, when they see	1
Return of love, more blest may be the view;	1
Else call it winter, which being full of care	1
Makes summer's welcome thrice more wish'd, more rare.	1

Being your slave, what should I do but tend	1
Upon the hours and times of your desire?	1
I have no precious time at all to spend,	1
Nor services to do, till you require.	1
Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour	1
Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you,	1
Nor think the bitterness of absence sour	1
When you have bid your servant once adieu;	1
Nor dare I question with my jealous thought	1
Where you may be, or your affairs suppose,	1
But, like a sad slave, stay and think of nought	1
Save, where you are how happy you make those.	1
So true a fool is love that in your will,	1
Though you do any thing, he thinks no ill.	1

That god forbid that made me first your slave,	1
I should in thought control your times of pleasure,	1
Or at your hand the account of hours to crave,	1
Being your vassal, bound to stay your leisure!	1
O, let me suffer, being at your beck,	1
The imprison'd absence of your liberty;	1
And patience, tame to sufferance, bide each cheque,	1
Without accusing you of injury.	1
Be where you list, your charter is so strong	1
That you yourself may privilege your time	1
To what you will; to you it doth belong	1
Yourself to pardon of self-doing crime.	1
I am to wait, though waiting so be hell;	1
Not blame your pleasure, be it ill or well.	1

If there be nothing new, but that which is	1
Hath been before, how are our brains beguiled,	1
Which, labouring for invention, bear amiss	1
The second burden of a former child!	1
O, that record could with a backward look,	1
Even of five hundred courses of the sun,	1
Show me your image in some antique book,	1
Since mind at first in character was done!	1
That I might see what the old world could say	1
To this composed wonder of your frame;	1
Whether we are mended, or whether better they,	1
Or whether revolution be the same.	1
O, sure I am, the wits of former days	1
To subjects worse have given admiring praise.	1

Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore,	1
So do our minutes hasten to their end;	1
Each changing place with that which goes before,	1
In sequent toil all forwards do contend.	1
Nativity, once in the main of light,	1
Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crown'd,	1
Crooked elipses 'gainst his glory fight,	1
And Time that gave doth now his gift confound.	1
Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth	1
And delves the parallels in beauty's brow,	1
Feeds on the rarities of nature's truth,	1
And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow:	1
And yet to times in hope my verse shall stand,	1
Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand.	1

Is it thy will thy image should keep open	1
My heavy eyelids to the weary night?	1
Dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken,	1
While shadows like to thee do mock my sight?	1
Is it thy spirit that thou send'st from thee	1
So far from home into my deeds to pry,	1
To find out shames and idle hours in me,	1
The scope and tenor of thy jealousy?	1
O, no! thy love, though much, is not so great:	1
It is my love that keeps mine eye awake;	1
Mine own true love that doth my rest defeat,	1
To play the watchman ever for thy sake:	1
For thee watch I whilst thou dost wake elsewhere,	1
From me far off, with others all too near.	1

Sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye	1
And all my soul and all my every part;	1
And for this sin there is no remedy,	1
It is so grounded inward in my heart.	1
Methinks no face so gracious is as mine,	1
No shape so true, no truth of such account;	1
And for myself mine own worth do define,	1
As I all other in all worths surmount.	1
But when my glass shows me myself indeed,	1
Beated and chopp'd with tann'd antiquity,	1
Mine own self-love quite contrary I read;	1
Self so self-loving were iniquity.	1
'Tis thee, myself, that for myself I praise,	1
Painting my age with beauty of thy days.	1

Against my love shall be, as I am now,	1
With Time's injurious hand crush'd and o'er-worn;	1
When hours have drain'd his blood and fill'd his brow	1
With lines and wrinkles; when his youthful morn	1
Hath travell'd on to age's steepy night,	1
And all those beauties whereof now he's king	1
Are vanishing or vanish'd out of sight,	1
Stealing away the treasure of his spring;	1
For such a time do I now fortify	1
Against confounding age's cruel knife,	1
That he shall never cut from memory	1
My sweet love's beauty, though my lover's life:	1
His beauty shall in these black lines be seen,	1
And they shall live, and he in them still green.	1

When I have seen by Time's fell hand defaced	1
The rich proud cost of outworn buried age;	1
When sometime lofty towers I see down-razed	1
And brass eternal slave to mortal rage;	1
When I have seen the hungry ocean gain	1
Advantage on the kingdom of the shore,	1
And the firm soil win of the watery main,	1
Increasing store with loss and loss with store;	1
When I have seen such interchange of state,	1
Or state itself confounded to decay;	1
Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate,	1
That Time will come and take my love away.	1
This thought is as a death, which cannot choose	1
But weep to have that which it fears to lose.	1

Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea,	1
But sad mortality o'er-sways their power,	1
How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea,	1
Whose action is no stronger than a flower?	1
O, how shall summer's honey breath hold out	1
Against the wreckful siege of battering days,	1
When rocks impregnable are not so stout,	1
Nor gates of steel so strong, but Time decays?	1
O fearful meditation! where, alack,	1
Shall Time's best jewel from Time's chest lie hid?	1
Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back?	1
Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?	1
O, none, unless this miracle have might,	1
That in black ink my love may still shine bright.	1

Tired with all these, for restful death I cry,	1
As, to behold desert a beggar born,	1
And needy nothing trimm'd in jollity,	1
And purest faith unhappily forsworn,	1
And guilded honour shamefully misplaced,	1
And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted,	1
And right perfection wrongfully disgraced,	1
And strength by limping sway disabled,	1
And art made tongue-tied by authority,	1
And folly doctor-like controlling skill,	1
And simple truth miscall'd simplicity,	1
And captive good attending captain ill:	1
Tired with all these, from these would I be gone,	1
Save that, to die, I leave my love alone.	1

Ah! wherefore with infection should he live,	1
And with his presence grace impiety,	1
That sin by him advantage should achieve	1
And lace itself with his society?	1
Why should false painting imitate his cheek	1
And steal dead seeing of his living hue?	1
Why should poor beauty indirectly seek	1
Roses of shadow, since his rose is true?	1
Why should he live, now Nature bankrupt is,	1
Beggar'd of blood to blush through lively veins?	1
For she hath no exchequer now but his,	1
And, proud of many, lives upon his gains.	1
O, him she stores, to show what wealth she had	1
In days long since, before these last so bad.	1

Thus is his cheek the map of days outworn,	1
When beauty lived and died as flowers do now,	1
Before the bastard signs of fair were born,	1
Or durst inhabit on a living brow;	1
Before the golden tresses of the dead,	1
The right of sepulchres, were shorn away,	1
To live a second life on second head;	1
Ere beauty's dead fleece made another gay:	1
In him those holy antique hours are seen,	1
Without all ornament, itself and true,	1
Making no summer of another's green,	1
Robbing no old to dress his beauty new;	1
And him as for a map doth Nature store,	1
To show false Art what beauty was of yore.	1

Those parts of thee that the world's eye doth view	1
Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend;	1
All tongues, the voice of souls, give thee that due,	1
Uttering bare truth, even so as foes commend.	1
Thy outward thus with outward praise is crown'd;	1
But those same tongues that give thee so thine own	1
In other accents do this praise confound	1
By seeing farther than the eye hath shown.	1
They look into the beauty of thy mind,	1
And that, in guess, they measure by thy deeds;	1
Then, churls, their thoughts, although their eyes were kind,	1
To thy fair flower add the rank smell of weeds:	1
But why thy odour matcheth not thy show,	1
The solve is this, that thou dost common grow.	1

That thou art blamed shall not be thy defect,	1
For slander's mark was ever yet the fair;	1
The ornament of beauty is suspect,	1
A crow that flies in heaven's sweetest air.	1
So thou be good, slander doth but approve	1
Thy worth the greater, being woo'd of time;	1
For canker vice the sweetest buds doth love,	1
And thou present'st a pure unstained prime.	1
Thou hast pass'd by the ambush of young days,	1
Either not assail'd or victor being charged;	1
Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise,	1
To tie up envy evermore enlarged:	1
If some suspect of ill mask'd not thy show,	1
Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe.	1

No longer mourn for me when I am dead	1
Then you shall hear the surly sullen bell	1
Give warning to the world that I am fled	1
From this vile world, with vilest worms to dwell:	1
Nay, if you read this line, remember not	1
The hand that writ it; for I love you so	1
That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot	1
If thinking on me then should make you woe.	1
O, if, I say, you look upon this verse	1
When I perhaps compounded am with clay,	1
Do not so much as my poor name rehearse.	1
But let your love even with my life decay,	1
Lest the wise world should look into your moan	1
And mock you with me after I am gone.	1

O, lest the world should task you to recite	1
What merit lived in me, that you should love	1
After my death, dear love, forget me quite,	1
For you in me can nothing worthy prove;	1
Unless you would devise some virtuous lie,	1
To do more for me than mine own desert,	1
And hang more praise upon deceased I	1
Than niggard truth would willingly impart:	1
O, lest your true love may seem false in this,	1
That you for love speak well of me untrue,	1
My name be buried where my body is,	1
And live no more to shame nor me nor you.	1
For I am shamed by that which I bring forth,	1
And so should you, to love things nothing worth.	1

That time of year thou mayst in me behold	1
When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang	1
Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,	1
Bare ruin'd choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.	1
In me thou seest the twilight of such day	1
As after sunset fadeth in the west,	1
Which by and by black night doth take away,	1
Death's second self, that seals up all in rest.	1
In me thou see'st the glowing of such fire	1
That on the ashes of his youth doth lie,	1
As the death-bed whereon it must expire	1
Consumed with that which it was nourish'd by.	1
This thou perceivest, which makes thy love more strong,	1
To love that well which thou must leave ere long.	1

But be contented: when that fell arrest	1
Without all bail shall carry me away,	1
My life hath in this line some interest,	1
Which for memorial still with thee shall stay.	1
When thou reviewest this, thou dost review	1
The very part was consecrate to thee:	1
The earth can have but earth, which is his due;	1
My spirit is thine, the better part of me:	1
So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life,	1
The prey of worms, my body being dead,	1
The coward conquest of a wretch's knife,	1
Too base of thee to be remembered.	1
The worth of that is that which it contains,	1
And that is this, and this with thee remains.	1

So are you to my thoughts as food to life,	1
Or as sweet-season'd showers are to the ground;	1
And for the peace of you I hold such strife	1
As 'twixt a miser and his wealth is found;	1
Now proud as an enjoyer and anon	1
Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure,	1
Now counting best to be with you alone,	1
Then better'd that the world may see my pleasure;	1
Sometime all full with feasting on your sight	1
And by and by clean starved for a look;	1
Possessing or pursuing no delight,	1
Save what is had or must from you be took.	1
Thus do I pine and surfeit day by day,	1
Or gluttoning on all, or all away.	1

Why is my verse so barren of new pride,	1
So far from variation or quick change?	1
Why with the time do I not glance aside	1
To new-found methods and to compounds strange?	1
Why write I still all one, ever the same,	1
And keep invention in a noted weed,	1
That every word doth almost tell my name,	1
Showing their birth and where they did proceed?	1
O, know, sweet love, I always write of you,	1
And you and love are still my argument;	1
So all my best is dressing old words new,	1
Spending again what is already spent:	1
For as the sun is daily new and old,	1
So is my love still telling what is told.	1

Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear,	1
Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste;	1
The vacant leaves thy mind's imprint will bear,	1
And of this book this learning mayst thou taste.	1
The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show	1
Of mouthed graves will give thee memory;	1
Thou by thy dial's shady stealth mayst know	1
Time's thievish progress to eternity.	1
Look, what thy memory can not contain	1
Commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find	1
Those children nursed, deliver'd from thy brain,	1
To take a new acquaintance of thy mind.	1
These offices, so oft as thou wilt look,	1
Shall profit thee and much enrich thy book.	1

So oft have I invoked thee for my Muse	1
And found such fair assistance in my verse	1
As every alien pen hath got my use	1
And under thee their poesy disperse.	1
Thine eyes that taught the dumb on high to sing	1
And heavy ignorance aloft to fly	1
Have added feathers to the learned's wing	1
And given grace a double majesty.	1
Yet be most proud of that which I compile,	1
Whose influence is thine and born of thee:	1
In others' works thou dost but mend the style,	1
And arts with thy sweet graces graced be;	1
But thou art all my art and dost advance	1
As high as learning my rude ignorance.	1

Whilst I alone did call upon thy aid,	1
My verse alone had all thy gentle grace,	1
But now my gracious numbers are decay'd	1
And my sick Muse doth give another place.	1
I grant, sweet love, thy lovely argument	1
Deserves the travail of a worthier pen,	1
Yet what of thee thy poet doth invent	1
He robs thee of and pays it thee again.	1
He lends thee virtue and he stole that word	1
From thy behavior; beauty doth he give	1
And found it in thy cheek; he can afford	1
No praise to thee but what in thee doth live.	1
Then thank him not for that which he doth say,	1
Since what he owes thee thou thyself dost pay.	1

O, how I faint when I of you do write,	1
Knowing a better spirit doth use your name,	1
And in the praise thereof spends all his might,	1
To make me tongue-tied, speaking of your fame!	1
But since your worth, wide as the ocean is,	1
The humble as the proudest sail doth bear,	1
My saucy bark inferior far to his	1
On your broad main doth wilfully appear.	1
Your shallowest help will hold me up afloat,	1
Whilst he upon your soundless deep doth ride;	1
Or being wreck'd, I am a worthless boat,	1
He of tall building and of goodly pride:	1
Then if he thrive and I be cast away,	1
The worst was this; my love was my decay.	1

Or I shall live your epitaph to make,	1
Or you survive when I in earth am rotten;	1
From hence your memory death cannot take,	1
Although in me each part will be forgotten.	1
Your name from hence immortal life shall have,	1
Though I, once gone, to all the world must die:	1
The earth can yield me but a common grave,	1
When you entombed in men's eyes shall lie.	1
Your monument shall be my gentle verse,	1
Which eyes not yet created shall o'er-read,	1
And tongues to be your being shall rehearse	1
When all the breathers of this world are dead;	1
You still shall live--such virtue hath my pen--	1
Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men.	1

I grant thou wert not married to my Muse	1
And therefore mayst without attaint o'erlook	1
The dedicated words which writers use	1
Of their fair subject, blessing every book	1
Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue,	1
Finding thy worth a limit past my praise,	1
And therefore art enforced to seek anew	1
Some fresher stamp of the time-bettering days	1
And do so, love; yet when they have devised	1
What strained touches rhetoric can lend,	1
Thou truly fair wert truly sympathized	1
In true plain words by thy true-telling friend;	1
And their gross painting might be better used	1
Where cheeks need blood; in thee it is abused.	1

I never saw that you did painting need	1
And therefore to your fair no painting set;	1
I found, or thought I found, you did exceed	1
The barren tender of a poet's debt;	1
And therefore have I slept in your report,	1
That you yourself being extant well might show	1
How far a modern quill doth come too short,	1
Speaking of worth, what worth in you doth grow.	1
This silence for my sin you did impute,	1
Which shall be most my glory, being dumb;	1
For I impair not beauty being mute,	1
When others would give life and bring a tomb.	1
There lives more life in one of your fair eyes	1
Than both your poets can in praise devise.	1

Who is it that says most? which can say more	1
Than this rich praise, that you alone are you?	1
In whose confine immured is the store	1
Which should example where your equal grew.	1
Lean penury within that pen doth dwell	1
That to his subject lends not some small glory;	1
But he that writes of you, if he can tell	1
That you are you, so dignifies his story,	1
Let him but copy what in you is writ,	1
Not making worse what nature made so clear,	1
And such a counterpart shall fame his wit,	1
Making his style admired every where.	1
You to your beauteous blessings add a curse,	1
Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse.	1

My tongue-tied Muse in manners holds her still,	1
While comments of your praise, richly compiled,	1
Reserve their character with golden quill	1
And precious phrase by all the Muses filed.	1
I think good thoughts whilst other write good words,	1
And like unletter'd clerk still cry 'Amen'	1
To every hymn that able spirit affords	1
In polish'd form of well-refined pen.	1
Hearing you praised, I say 'Tis so, 'tis true,'	1
And to the most of praise add something more;	1
But that is in my thought, whose love to you,	1
Though words come hindmost, holds his rank before.	1
Then others for the breath of words respect,	1
Me for my dumb thoughts, speaking in effect.	1

Was it the proud full sail of his great verse,	1
Bound for the prize of all too precious you,	1
That did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearse,	1
Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew?	1
Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write	1
Above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead?	1
No, neither he, nor his compeers by night	1
Giving him aid, my verse astonished.	1
He, nor that affable familiar ghost	1
Which nightly gulls him with intelligence	1
As victors of my silence cannot boast;	1
I was not sick of any fear from thence:	1
But when your countenance fill'd up his line,	1
Then lack'd I matter; that enfeebled mine.	1

Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing,	1
And like enough thou know'st thy estimate:	1
The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing;	1
My bonds in thee are all determinate.	1
For how do I hold thee but by thy granting?	1
And for that riches where is my deserving?	1
The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting,	1
And so my patent back again is swerving.	1
Thyself thou gavest, thy own worth then not knowing,	1
Or me, to whom thou gavest it, else mistaking;	1
So thy great gift, upon misprision growing,	1
Comes home again, on better judgment making.	1
Thus have I had thee, as a dream doth flatter,	1
In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.	1

When thou shalt be disposed to set me light,	1
And place my merit in the eye of scorn,	1
Upon thy side against myself I'll fight,	1
And prove thee virtuous, though thou art forsworn.	1
With mine own weakness being best acquainted,	1
Upon thy part I can set down a story	1
Of faults conceal'd, wherein I am attainted,	1
That thou in losing me shalt win much glory:	1
And I by this will be a gainer too;	1
For bending all my loving thoughts on thee,	1
The injuries that to myself I do,	1
Doing thee vantage, double-vantage me.	1
Such is my love, to thee I so belong,	1
That for thy right myself will bear all wrong.	1

Say that thou didst forsake me for some fault,	1
And I will comment upon that offence;	1
Speak of my lameness, and I straight will halt,	1
Against thy reasons making no defence.	1
Thou canst not, love, disgrace me half so ill,	1
To set a form upon desired change,	1
As I'll myself disgrace: knowing thy will,	1
I will acquaintance strangle and look strange,	1
Be absent from thy walks, and in my tongue	1
Thy sweet beloved name no more shall dwell,	1
Lest I, too much profane, should do it wrong	1
And haply of our old acquaintance tell.	1
For thee against myself I'll vow debate,	1
For I must ne'er love him whom thou dost hate.	1

Then hate me when thou wilt; if ever, now;	1
Now, while the world is bent my deeds to cross,	1
Join with the spite of fortune, make me bow,	1
And do not drop in for an after-loss:	1
Ah, do not, when my heart hath 'scoped this sorrow,	1
Come in the rearward of a conquer'd woe;	1
Give not a windy night a rainy morrow,	1
To linger out a purposed overthrow.	1
If thou wilt leave me, do not leave me last,	1
When other petty griefs have done their spite	1
But in the onset come; so shall I taste	1
At first the very worst of fortune's might,	1
And other strains of woe, which now seem woe,	1
Compared with loss of thee will not seem so.	1

Some glory in their birth, some in their skill,	1
Some in their wealth, some in their bodies' force,	1
Some in their garments, though new-fangled ill,	1
Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse;	1
And every humour hath his adjunct pleasure,	1
Wherein it finds a joy above the rest:	1
But these particulars are not my measure;	1
All these I better in one general best.	1
Thy love is better than high birth to me,	1
Richer than wealth, prouder than garments' cost,	1
Of more delight than hawks or horses be;	1
And having thee, of all men's pride I boast:	1
Wretched in this alone, that thou mayst take	1
All this away and me most wretched make.	1

But do thy worst to steal thyself away,	1
For term of life thou art assured mine,	1
And life no longer than thy love will stay,	1
For it depends upon that love of thine.	1
Then need I not to fear the worst of wrongs,	1
When in the least of them my life hath end.	1
I see a better state to me belongs	1
Than that which on thy humour doth depend;	1
Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind,	1
Since that my life on thy revolt doth lie.	1
O, what a happy title do I find,	1
Happy to have thy love, happy to die!	1
But what's so blessed-fair that fears no blot?	1
Thou mayst be false, and yet I know it not.	1

So shall I live, supposing thou art true,	1
Like a deceived husband; so love's face	1
May still seem love to me, though alter'd new;	1
Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place:	1
For there can live no hatred in thine eye,	1
Therefore in that I cannot know thy change.	1
In many's looks the false heart's history	1
Is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange,	1
But heaven in thy creation did decree	1
That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell;	1
Whate'er thy thoughts or thy heart's workings be,	1
Thy looks should nothing thence but sweetness tell.	1
How like Eve's apple doth thy beauty grow,	1
if thy sweet virtue answer not thy show!	1

They that have power to hurt and will do none,	1
That do not do the thing they most do show,	1
Who, moving others, are themselves as stone,	1
Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow,	1
They rightly do inherit heaven's graces	1
And husband nature's riches from expense;	1
They are the lords and owners of their faces,	1
Others but stewards of their excellence.	1
The summer's flower is to the summer sweet,	1
Though to itself it only live and die,	1
But if that flower with base infection meet,	1
The basest weed outbraves his dignity:	1
For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds;	1
Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds.	1

How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame	1
Which, like a canker in the fragrant rose,	1
Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name!	1
O, in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose!	1
That tongue that tells the story of thy days,	1
Making lascivious comments on thy sport,	1
Cannot dispraise but in a kind of praise;	1
Naming thy name blesses an ill report.	1
O, what a mansion have those vices got	1
Which for their habitation chose out thee,	1
Where beauty's veil doth cover every blot,	1
And all things turn to fair that eyes can see!	1
Take heed, dear heart, of this large privilege;	1
The hardest knife ill-used doth lose his edge.	1

Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonness;	1
Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport;	1
Both grace and faults are loved of more and less;	1
Thou makest faults graces that to thee resort.	1
As on the finger of a throned queen	1
The basest jewel will be well esteem'd,	1
So are those errors that in thee are seen	1
To truths translated and for true things deem'd.	1
How many lambs might the stem wolf betray,	1
If like a lamb he could his looks translate!	1
How many gazers mightst thou lead away,	1
If thou wouldst use the strength of all thy state!	1
But do not so; I love thee in such sort	1
As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report.	1

How like a winter hath my absence been	1
From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year!	1
What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen!	1
What old December's bareness every where!	1
And yet this time removed was summer's time,	1
The teeming autumn, big with rich increase,	1
Bearing the wanton burden of the prime,	1
Like widow'd wombs after their lords' decease:	1
Yet this abundant issue seem'd to me	1
But hope of orphans and unfather'd fruit;	1
For summer and his pleasures wait on thee,	1
And, thou away, the very birds are mute;	1
Or, if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer	1
That leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near.	1

From you have I been absent in the spring,	1
When proud-pied April dress'd in all his trim	1
Hath put a spirit of youth in every thing,	1
That heavy Saturn laugh'd and leap'd with him.	1
Yet nor the lays of birds nor the sweet smell	1
Of different flowers in odour and in hue	1
Could make me any summer's story tell,	1
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew;	1
Nor did I wonder at the lily's white,	1
Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose;	1
They were but sweet, but figures of delight,	1
Drawn after you, you pattern of all those.	1
Yet seem'd it winter still, and, you away,	1
As with your shadow I with these did play:	1

The forward violet thus did I chide:	1
Sweet thief, whence didst thou steal thy sweet that smells,	1
If not from my love's breath? The purple pride	1
Which on thy soft cheek for complexion dwells	1
In my love's veins thou hast too grossly dyed.	1
The lily I condemned for thy hand,	1
And buds of marjoram had stol'n thy hair:	1
The roses fearfully on thorns did stand,	1
One blushing shame, another white despair;	1
A third, nor red nor white, had stol'n of both	1
And to his robbery had annex'd thy breath;	1
But, for his theft, in pride of all his growth	1
A vengeful canker eat him up to death.	1
More flowers I noted, yet I none could s	1

Where art thou, Muse, that thou forget'st so long	1
To speak of that which gives thee all thy might?	1
Spend'st thou thy fury on some worthless song,	1
Darkening thy power to lend base subjects light?	1
Return, forgetful Muse, and straight redeem	1
In gentle numbers time so idly spent;	1
Sing to the ear that doth thy lays esteem	1
And gives thy pen both skill and argument.	1
Rise, resty Muse, my love's sweet face survey,	1
If Time have any wrinkle graven there;	1
If any, be a satire to decay,	1
And make Time's spoils despised every where.	1
Give my love fame faster than Time wastes life;	1
So thou prevent'st his scythe and crooked knife.	1

O truant Muse, what shall be thy amends	1
For thy neglect of truth in beauty dyed?	1
Both truth and beauty on my love depends;	1
So dost thou too, and therein dignified.	1
Make answer, Muse: wilt thou not haply say	1
'Truth needs no colour, with his colour fix'd;	1
Beauty no pencil, beauty's truth to lay;	1
But best is best, if never intermix'd?'	1
Because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb?	1
Excuse not silence so; for't lies in thee	1
To make him much outlive a gilded tomb,	1
And to be praised of ages yet to be.	1
Then do thy office, Muse; I teach thee how	1
To make him seem long hence as he shows now.	1

My love is strengthen'd, though more weak in seeming;	1
I love not less, though less the show appear:	1
That love is merchandized whose rich esteeming	1
The owner's tongue doth publish every where.	1
Our love was new and then but in the spring	1
When I was wont to greet it with my lays,	1
As Philomel in summer's front doth sing	1
And stops her pipe in growth of riper days:	1
Not that the summer is less pleasant now	1
Than when her mournful hymns did hush the night,	1
But that wild music burthens every bough	1
And sweets grown common lose their dear delight.	1
Therefore like her I sometime hold my tongue,	1
Because I would not dull you with my song.	1

Alack, what poverty my Muse brings forth,	1
That having such a scope to show her pride,	1
The argument all bare is of more worth	1
Than when it hath my added praise beside!	1
O, blame me not, if I no more can write!	1
Look in your glass, and there appears a face	1
That over-goes my blunt invention quite,	1
Dulling my lines and doing me disgrace.	1
Were it not sinful then, striving to mend,	1
To mar the subject that before was well?	1
For to no other pass my verses tend	1
Than of your graces and your gifts to tell;	1
And more, much more, than in my verse can sit	1
Your own glass shows you when you look in it.	1

To me, fair friend, you never can be old,	1
For as you were when first your eye I eyed,	1
Such seems your beauty still. Three winters cold	1
Have from the forests shook three summers' pride,	1
Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turn'd	1
In process of the seasons have I seen,	1
Three April perfumes in three hot Junes burn'd,	1
Since first I saw you fresh, which yet are green.	1
Ah! yet doth beauty, like a dial-hand,	1
Steal from his figure and no pace perceived;	1
So your sweet hue, which methinks still doth stand,	1
Hath motion and mine eye may be deceived:	1
For fear of which, hear this, thou age unbred;	1
Ere you were born was beauty's summer dead.	1

Let not my love be call'd idolatry,	1
Nor my beloved as an idol show,	1
Since all alike my songs and praises be	1
To one, of one, still such, and ever so.	1
Kind is my love to-day, to-morrow kind,	1
Still constant in a wondrous excellence;	1
Therefore my verse to constancy confined,	1
One thing expressing, leaves out difference.	1
'Fair, kind and true' is all my argument,	1
'Fair, kind, and true' varying to other words;	1
And in this change is my invention spent,	1
Three themes in one, which wondrous scope affords.	1
'Fair, kind, and true,' have often lived alone,	1
Which three till now never kept seat in one.	1

When in the chronicle of wasted time	1
I see descriptions of the fairest wights,	1
And beauty making beautiful old rhyme	1
In praise of ladies dead and lovely knights,	1
Then, in the blazon of sweet beauty's best,	1
Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow,	1
I see their antique pen would have express'd	1
Even such a beauty as you master now.	1
So all their praises are but prophecies	1
Of this our time, all you prefiguring;	1
And, for they look'd but with divining eyes,	1
They had not skill enough your worth to sing:	1
For we, which now behold these present days,	1
Had eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise.	1

Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul	1
Of the wide world dreaming on things to come,	1
Can yet the lease of my true love control,	1
Supposed as forfeit to a confined doom.	1
The mortal moon hath her eclipse endured	1
And the sad augurs mock their own presage;	1
Incertainties now crown themselves assured	1
And peace proclaims olives of endless age.	1
Now with the drops of this most balmy time	1
My love looks fresh, and death to me subscribes,	1
Since, spite of him, I'll live in this poor rhyme,	1
While he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes:	1
And thou in this shalt find thy monument,	1
When tyrants' crests and tombs of brass are spent.	1

What's in the brain that ink may character	1
Which hath not figured to thee my true spirit?	1
What's new to speak, what new to register,	1
That may express my love or thy dear merit?	1
Nothing, sweet boy; but yet, like prayers divine,	1
I must, each day say o'er the very same,	1
Counting no old thing old, thou mine, I thine,	1
Even as when first I hallow'd thy fair name.	1
So that eternal love in love's fresh case	1
Weighs not the dust and injury of age,	1
Nor gives to necessary wrinkles place,	1
But makes antiquity for aye his page,	1
Finding the first conceit of love there bred	1
Where time and outward form would show it dead.	1

O, never say that I was false of heart,	1
Though absence seem'd my flame to qualify.	1
As easy might I from myself depart	1
As from my soul, which in thy breast doth lie:	1
That is my home of love: if I have ranged,	1
Like him that travels I return again,	1
Just to the time, not with the time exchanged,	1
So that myself bring water for my stain.	1
Never believe, though in my nature reign'd	1
All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood,	1
That it could so preposterously be stain'd,	1
To leave for nothing all thy sum of good;	1
For nothing this wide universe I call,	1
Save thou, my rose; in it thou art my all.	1

Alas, 'tis true I have gone here and there	1
And made myself a motley to the view,	1
Gored mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear,	1
Made old offences of affections new;	1
Most true it is that I have look'd on truth	1
Askance and strangely: but, by all above,	1
These blenches gave my heart another youth,	1
And worse essays proved thee my best of love.	1
Now all is done, have what shall have no end:	1
Mine appetite I never more will grind	1
On newer proof, to try an older friend,	1
A god in love, to whom I am confined.	1
Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best,	1
Even to thy pure and most most loving breast.	1

O, for my sake do you with Fortune chide,	1
The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds,	1
That did not better for my life provide	1
Than public means which public manners breeds.	1
Thence comes it that my name receives a brand,	1
And almost thence my nature is subdued	1
To what it works in, like the dyer's hand:	1
Pity me then and wish I were renew'd;	1
Whilst, like a willing patient, I will drink	1
Potions of eisel 'gainst my strong infection	1
No bitterness that I will bitter think,	1
Nor double penance, to correct correction.	1
Pity me then, dear friend, and I assure ye	1
Even that your pity is enough to cure me.	1

Your love and pity doth the impression fill	1
Which vulgar scandal stamp'd upon my brow;	1
For what care I who calls me well or ill,	1
So you o'er-green my bad, my good allow?	1
You are my all the world, and I must strive	1
To know my shames and praises from your tongue:	1
None else to me, nor I to none alive,	1
That my steel'd sense or changes right or wrong.	1
In so profound abysm I throw all care	1
Of others' voices, that my adder's sense	1
To critic and to flatterer stopped are.	1
Mark how with my neglect I do dispense:	1
You are so strongly in my purpose bred	1
That all the world besides methinks are dead.	1

Since I left you, mine eye is in my mind;	1
And that which governs me to go about	1
Doth part his function and is partly blind,	1
Seems seeing, but effectually is out;	1
For it no form delivers to the heart	1
Of bird of flower, or shape, which it doth latch:	1
Of his quick objects hath the mind no part,	1
Nor his own vision holds what it doth catch:	1
For if it see the rudest or gentlest sight,	1
The most sweet favour or deformed'st creature,	1
The mountain or the sea, the day or night,	1
The crow or dove, it shapes them to your feature:	1
Incapable of more, replete with you,	1
My most true mind thus makes mine eye untrue.	1

Or whether doth my mind, being crown'd with you,	1
Drink up the monarch's plague, this flattery?	1
Or whether shall I say, mine eye saith true,	1
And that your love taught it this alchemy,	1
To make of monsters and things indigest	1
Such cherubins as your sweet self resemble,	1
Creating every bad a perfect best,	1
As fast as objects to his beams assemble?	1
O,'tis the first; 'tis flattery in my seeing,	1
And my great mind most kingly drinks it up:	1
Mine eye well knows what with his gust is 'greeing,	1
And to his palate doth prepare the cup:	1
If it be poison'd, 'tis the lesser sin	1
That mine eye loves it and doth first begin.	1

Those lines that I before have writ do lie,	1
Even those that said I could not love you dearer:	1
Yet then my judgment knew no reason why	1
My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer.	1
But reckoning time, whose million'd accidents	1
Creep in 'twixt vows and change decrees of kings,	1
Tan sacred beauty, blunt the sharp'st intents,	1
Divert strong minds to the course of altering things;	1
Alas, why, fearing of time's tyranny,	1
Might I not then say 'Now I love you best,'	1
When I was certain o'er incertainty,	1
Crowning the present, doubting of the rest?	1
Love is a babe; then might I not say so,	1
To give full growth to that which still doth grow?	1

Let me not to the marriage of true minds	1
Admit impediments. Love is not love	1
Which alters when it alteration finds,	1
Or bends with the remover to remove:	1
O no! it is an ever-fixed mark	1
That looks on tempests and is never shaken;	1
It is the star to every wandering bark,	1
Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken.	1
Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks	1
Within his bending sickle's compass come:	1
Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,	1
But bears it out even to the edge of doom.	1
If this be error and upon me proved,	1
I never writ, nor no man ever loved.	1

Accuse me thus: that I have scanted all	1
Wherein I should your great deserts repay,	1
Forgot upon your dearest love to call,	1
Whereto all bonds do tie me day by day;	1
That I have frequent been with unknown minds	1
And given to time your own dear-purchased right	1
That I have hoisted sail to all the winds	1
Which should transport me farthest from your sight.	1
Book both my wilfulness and errors down	1
And on just proof surmise accumulate;	1
Bring me within the level of your frown,	1
But shoot not at me in your waken'd hate;	1
Since my appeal says I did strive to prove	1
The constancy and virtue of your love.	1

Like as, to make our appetites more keen,	1
With eager compounds we our palate urge,	1
As, to prevent our maladies unseen,	1
We sicken to shun sickness when we purge,	1
Even so, being tuff of your ne'er-cloying sweetness,	1
To bitter sauces did I frame my feeding	1
And, sick of welfare, found a kind of meetness	1
To be diseased ere that there was true needing.	1
Thus policy in love, to anticipate	1
The ills that were not, grew to faults assured	1
And brought to medicine a healthful state	1
Which, rank of goodness, would by ill be cured:	1
But thence I learn, and find the lesson true,	1
Drugs poison him that so fell sick of you.	1

What potions have I drunk of Siren tears,	1
Distill'd from limbecks foul as hell within,	1
Applying fears to hopes and hopes to fears,	1
Still losing when I saw myself to win!	1
What wretched errors hath my heart committed,	1
Whilst it hath thought itself so blessed never!	1
How have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted	1
In the distraction of this madding fever!	1
O benefit of ill! now I find true	1
That better is by evil still made better;	1
And ruin'd love, when it is built anew,	1
Grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater.	1
So I return rebuked to my content	1
And gain by ill thrice more than I have spent.	1

That you were once unkind befriends me now,	1
And for that sorrow which I then did feel	1
Needs must I under my transgression bow,	1
Unless my nerves were brass or hammer'd steel.	1
For if you were by my unkindness shaken	1
As I by yours, you've pass'd a hell of time,	1
And I, a tyrant, have no leisure taken	1
To weigh how once I suffered in your crime.	1
O, that our night of woe might have remember'd	1
My deepest sense, how hard true sorrow hits,	1
And soon to you, as you to me, then tender'd	1
The humble slave which wounded bosoms fits!	1
But that your trespass now becomes a fee;	1
Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransom me.	1

'Tis better to be vile than vile esteem'd,	1
When not to be receives reproach of being,	1
And the just pleasure lost which is so deem'd	1
Not by our feeling but by others' seeing:	1
For why should others false adulterate eyes	1
Give salutation to my sportive blood?	1
Or on my frailties why are frailer spies,	1
Which in their wills count bad what I think good?	1
No, I am that I am, and they that level	1
At my abuses reckon up their own:	1
I may be straight, though they themselves be bevel;	1
By their rank thoughts my deeds must not be shown;	1
Unless this general evil they maintain,	1
All men are bad, and in their badness reign.	1

Thy gift, thy tables, are within my brain	1
Full character'd with lasting memory,	1
Which shall above that idle rank remain	1
Beyond all date, even to eternity;	1
Or at the least, so long as brain and heart	1
Have faculty by nature to subsist;	1
Till each to razed oblivion yield his part	1
Of thee, thy record never can be miss'd.	1
That poor retention could not so much hold,	1
Nor need I tallies thy dear love to score;	1
Therefore to give them from me was I bold,	1
To trust those tables that receive thee more:	1
To keep an adjunct to remember thee	1
Were to import forgetfulness in me.	1

No, Time, thou shalt not boast that I do change:	1
Thy pyramids built up with newer might	1
To me are nothing novel, nothing strange;	1
They are but dressings of a former sight.	1
Our dates are brief, and therefore we admire	1
What thou dost foist upon us that is old,	1
And rather make them born to our desire	1
Than think that we before have heard them told.	1
Thy registers and thee I both defy,	1
Not wondering at the present nor the past,	1
For thy records and what we see doth lie,	1
Made more or less by thy continual haste.	1
This I do vow and this shall ever be;	1
I will be true, despite thy scythe and thee.	1

If my dear love were but the child of state,	1
It might for Fortune's bastard be unfather'd'	1
As subject to Time's love or to Time's hate,	1
Weeds among weeds, or flowers with flowers gather'd.	1
No, it was builded far from accident;	1
It suffers not in smiling pomp, nor falls	1
Under the blow of thralled discontent,	1
Whereto the inviting time our fashion calls:	1
It fears not policy, that heretic,	1
Which works on leases of short-number'd hours,	1
But all alone stands hugely politic,	1
That it nor grows with heat nor drowns with showers.	1
To this I witness call the fools of time,	1
Which die for goodness, who have lived for crime.	1

Were 't aught to me I bore the canopy,	1
With my extern the outward honouring,	1
Or laid great bases for eternity,	1
Which prove more short than waste or ruining?	1
Have I not seen dwellers on form and favour	1
Lose all, and more, by paying too much rent,	1
For compound sweet forgoing simple savour,	1
Pitiful thrivers, in their gazing spent?	1
No, let me be obsequious in thy heart,	1
And take thou my oblation, poor but free,	1
Which is not mix'd with seconds, knows no art,	1
But mutual render, only me for thee.	1
Hence, thou suborn'd informer! a true soul	1
When most impeach'd stands least in thy control.	1

O thou, my lovely boy, who in thy power	1
Dost hold Time's fickle glass, his sickle, hour;	1
Who hast by waning grown, and therein show'st	1
Thy lovers withering as thy sweet self grow'st;	1
If Nature, sovereign mistress over wrack,	1
As thou goest onwards, still will pluck thee back,	1
She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill	1
May time disgrace and wretched minutes kill.	1
Yet fear her, O thou minion of her pleasure!	1
She may detain, but not still keep, her treasure:	1
Her audit, though delay'd, answer'd must be,	1
And her quietus is to render thee.	1
(    )	1
(    )	1

In the old age black was not counted fair,	1
Or if it were, it bore not beauty's name;	1
But now is black beauty's successive heir,	1
And beauty slander'd with a bastard shame:	1
For since each hand hath put on nature's power,	1
Fairing the foul with art's false borrow'd face,	1
Sweet beauty hath no name, no holy bower,	1
But is profaned, if not lives in disgrace.	1
Therefore my mistress' brows are raven black,	1
Her eyes so suited, and they mourners seem	1
At such who, not born fair, no beauty lack,	1
Slandering creation with a false esteem:	1
Yet so they mourn, becoming of their woe,	1
That every tongue says beauty should look so.	1

How oft, when thou, my music, music play'st,	1
Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds	1
With thy sweet fingers, when thou gently sway'st	1
The wiry concord that mine ear confounds,	1
Do I envy those jacks that nimble leap	1
To kiss the tender inward of thy hand,	1
Whilst my poor lips, which should that harvest reap,	1
At the wood's boldness by thee blushing stand!	1
To be so tickled, they would change their state	1
And situation with those dancing chips,	1
O'er whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait,	1
Making dead wood more blest than living lips.	1
Since saucy jacks so happy are in this,	1
Give them thy fingers, me thy lips to kiss.	1

The expense of spirit in a waste of shame	1
Is lust in action; and till action, lust	1
Is perjured, murderous, bloody, full of blame,	1
Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust,	1
Enjoy'd no sooner but despised straight,	1
Past reason hunted, and no sooner had	1
Past reason hated, as a swallow'd bait	1
On purpose laid to make the taker mad;	1
Mad in pursuit and in possession so;	1
Had, having, and in quest to have, extreme;	1
A bliss in proof, and proved, a very woe;	1
Before, a joy proposed; behind, a dream.	1
All this the world well knows; yet none knows well	1
To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.	1

My mistress' eyes are nothing like the sun;	1
Coral is far more red than her lips' red;	1
If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun;	1
If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head.	1
I have seen roses damask'd, red and white,	1
But no such roses see I in her cheeks;	1
And in some perfumes is there more delight	1
Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks.	1
I love to hear her speak, yet well I know	1
That music hath a far more pleasing sound;	1
I grant I never saw a goddess go;	1
My mistress, when she walks, treads on the ground:	1
And yet, by heaven, I think my love as rare	1
As any she belied with false compare.	1

Thou art as tyrannous, so as thou art,	1
As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel;	1
For well thou know'st to my dear doting heart	1
Thou art the fairest and most precious jewel.	1
Yet, in good faith, some say that thee behold	1
Thy face hath not the power to make love groan:	1
To say they err I dare not be so bold,	1
Although I swear it to myself alone.	1
And, to be sure that is not false I swear,	1
A thousand groans, but thinking on thy face,	1
One on another's neck, do witness bear	1
Thy black is fairest in my judgment's place.	1
In nothing art thou black save in thy deeds,	1
And thence this slander, as I think, proceeds.	1

Thine eyes I love, and they, as pitying me,	1
Knowing thy heart torments me with disdain,	1
Have put on black and loving mourners be,	1
Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain.	1
And truly not the morning sun of heaven	1
Better becomes the grey cheeks of the east,	1
Nor that full star that ushers in the even	1
Doth half that glory to the sober west,	1
As those two mourning eyes become thy face:	1
O, let it then as well beseem thy heart	1
To mourn for me, since mourning doth thee grace,	1
And suit thy pity like in every part.	1
Then will I swear beauty herself is black	1
And all they foul that thy complexion lack.	1

Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan	1
For that deep wound it gives my friend and me!	1
Is't not enough to torture me alone,	1
But slave to slavery my sweet'st friend must be?	1
Me from myself thy cruel eye hath taken,	1
And my next self thou harder hast engross'd:	1
Of him, myself, and thee, I am forsaken;	1
A torment thrice threefold thus to be cross'd.	1
Prison my heart in thy steel bosom's ward,	1
But then my friend's heart let my poor heart bail;	1
Whoe'er keeps me, let my heart be his guard;	1
Thou canst not then use rigor in my gaol:	1
And yet thou wilt; for I, being pent in thee,	1
Perforce am thine, and all that is in me.	1

So, now I have confess'd that he is thine,	1
And I myself am mortgaged to thy will,	1
Myself I'll forfeit, so that other mine	1
Thou wilt restore, to be my comfort still:	1
But thou wilt not, nor he will not be free,	1
For thou art covetous and he is kind;	1
He learn'd but surety-like to write for me	1
Under that bond that him as fast doth bind.	1
The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take,	1
Thou usurer, that put'st forth all to use,	1
And sue a friend came debtor for my sake;	1
So him I lose through my unkind abuse.	1
Him have I lost; thou hast both him and me:	1
He pays the whole, and yet am I not free.	1

Whoever hath her wish, thou hast thy 'Will,'	1
And 'Will' to boot, and 'Will' in overplus;	1
More than enough am I that vex thee still,	1
To thy sweet will making addition thus.	1
Wilt thou, whose will is large and spacious,	1
Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine?	1
Shall will in others seem right gracious,	1
And in my will no fair acceptance shine?	1
The sea all water, yet receives rain still	1
And in abundance addeth to his store;	1
So thou, being rich in 'Will,' add to thy 'Will'	1
One will of mine, to make thy large 'Will' more.	1
Let no unkind, no fair beseechers kill;	1
Think all but one, and me in that one 'Will.'	1

If thy soul cheque thee that I come so near,	1
Swear to thy blind soul that I was thy 'Will,'	1
And will, thy soul knows, is admitted there;	1
Thus far for love my love-suit, sweet, fulfil.	1
'Will' will fulfil the treasure of thy love,	1
Ay, fill it full with wills, and my will one.	1
In things of great receipt with ease we prove	1
Among a number one is reckon'd none:	1
Then in the number let me pass untold,	1
Though in thy stores' account I one must be;	1
For nothing hold me, so it please thee hold	1
That nothing me, a something sweet to thee:	1
Make but my name thy love, and love that still,	1
And then thou lovest me, for my name is 'Will.'	1

Thou blind fool, Love, what dost thou to mine eyes,	1
That they behold, and see not what they see?	1
They know what beauty is, see where it lies,	1
Yet what the best is take the worst to be.	1
If eyes corrupt by over-partial looks	1
Be anchor'd in the bay where all men ride,	1
Why of eyes' falsehood hast thou forged hooks,	1
Whereto the judgment of my heart is tied?	1
Why should my heart think that a several plot	1
Which my heart knows the wide world's common place?	1
Or mine eyes seeing this, say this is not,	1
To put fair truth upon so foul a face?	1
In things right true my heart and eyes have erred,	1
And to this false plague are they now transferr'd.	1

When my love swears that she is made of truth	1
I do believe her, though I know she lies,	1
That she might think me some untutor'd youth,	1
Unlearned in the world's false subtleties.	1
Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,	1
Although she knows my days are past the best,	1
Simply I credit her false speaking tongue:	1
On both sides thus is simple truth suppress'd.	1
But wherefore says she not she is unjust?	1
And wherefore say not I that I am old?	1
O, love's best habit is in seeming trust,	1
And age in love loves not to have years told:	1
Therefore I lie with her and she with me,	1
And in our faults by lies we flatter'd be.	1

O, call not me to justify the wrong	1
That thy unkindness lays upon my heart;	1
Wound me not with thine eye but with thy tongue;	1
Use power with power and slay me not by art.	1
Tell me thou lovest elsewhere, but in my sight,	1
Dear heart, forbear to glance thine eye aside:	1
What need'st thou wound with cunning when thy might	1
Is more than my o'er-press'd defense can bide?	1
Let me excuse thee: ah! my love well knows	1
Her pretty looks have been mine enemies,	1
And therefore from my face she turns my foes,	1
That they elsewhere might dart their injuries:	1
Yet do not so; but since I am near slain,	1
Kill me outright with looks and rid my pain.	1

Be wise as thou art cruel; do not press	1
My tongue-tied patience with too much disdain;	1
Lest sorrow lend me words and words express	1
The manner of my pity-wanting pain.	1
If I might teach thee wit, better it were,	1
Though not to love, yet, love, to tell me so;	1
As testy sick men, when their deaths be near,	1
No news but health from their physicians know;	1
For if I should despair, I should grow mad,	1
And in my madness might speak ill of thee:	1
Now this ill-wresting world is grown so bad,	1
Mad slanderers by mad ears believed be,	1
That I may not be so, nor thou belied,	1
Bear thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart go wide.	1

In faith, I do not love thee with mine eyes,	1
For they in thee a thousand errors note;	1
But 'tis my heart that loves what they despise,	1
Who in despite of view is pleased to dote;	1
Nor are mine ears with thy tongue's tune delighted,	1
Nor tender feeling, to base touches prone,	1
Nor taste, nor smell, desire to be invited	1
To any sensual feast with thee alone:	1
But my five wits nor my five senses can	1
Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee,	1
Who leaves unsway'd the likeness of a man,	1
Thy proud hearts slave and vassal wretch to be:	1
Only my plague thus far I count my gain,	1
That she that makes me sin awards me pain.	1

Love is my sin and thy dear virtue hate,	1
Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving:	1
O, but with mine compare thou thine own state,	1
And thou shalt find it merits not reproving;	1
Or, if it do, not from those lips of thine,	1
That have profaned their scarlet ornaments	1
And seal'd false bonds of love as oft as mine,	1
Robb'd others' beds' revenues of their rents.	1
Be it lawful I love thee, as thou lovest those	1
Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee:	1
Root pity in thy heart, that when it grows	1
Thy pity may deserve to pitied be.	1
If thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide,	1
By self-example mayst thou be denied!	1

Lo! as a careful housewife runs to catch	1
One of her feather'd creatures broke away,	1
Sets down her babe and makes an swift dispatch	1
In pursuit of the thing she would have stay,	1
Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase,	1
Cries to catch her whose busy care is bent	1
To follow that which flies before her face,	1
Not prizing her poor infant's discontent;	1
So runn'st thou after that which flies from thee,	1
Whilst I thy babe chase thee afar behind;	1
But if thou catch thy hope, turn back to me,	1
And play the mother's part, kiss me, be kind:	1
So will I pray that thou mayst have thy 'Will,'	1
If thou turn back, and my loud crying still.	1

Two loves I have of comfort and despair,	1
Which like two spirits do suggest me still:	1
The better angel is a man right fair,	1
The worser spirit a woman colour'd ill.	1
To win me soon to hell, my female evil	1
Tempteth my better angel from my side,	1
And would corrupt my saint to be a devil,	1
Wooing his purity with her foul pride.	1
And whether that my angel be turn'd fiend	1
Suspect I may, but not directly tell;	1
But being both from me, both to each friend,	1
I guess one angel in another's hell:	1
Yet this shall I ne'er know, but live in doubt,	1
Till my bad angel fire my good one out.	1

Those lips that Love's own hand did make	1
Breathed forth the sound that said 'I hate'	1
To me that languish'd for her sake;	1
But when she saw my woeful state,	1
Straight in her heart did mercy come,	1
Chiding that tongue that ever sweet	1
Was used in giving gentle doom,	1
And taught it thus anew to greet:	1
'I hate' she alter'd with an end,	1
That follow'd it as gentle day	1
Doth follow night, who like a fiend	1
From heaven to hell is flown away;	1
'I hate' from hate away she threw,	1
And saved my life, saying 'not you.'	1

Poor soul, the centre of my sinful earth,	1
[                 ] these rebel powers that thee array;	1
Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth,	1
Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?	1
Why so large cost, having so short a lease,	1
Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend?	1
Shall worms, inheritors of this excess,	1
Eat up thy charge? is this thy body's end?	1
Then soul, live thou upon thy servant's loss,	1
And let that pine to aggravate thy store;	1
Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross;	1
Within be fed, without be rich no more:	1
So shalt thou feed on Death, that feeds on men,	1
And Death once dead, there's no more dying then.	1

My love is as a fever, longing still	1
For that which longer nurseth the disease,	1
Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill,	1
The uncertain sickly appetite to please.	1
My reason, the physician to my love,	1
Angry that his prescriptions are not kept,	1
Hath left me, and I desperate now approve	1
Desire is death, which physic did except.	1
Past cure I am, now reason is past care,	1
And frantic-mad with evermore unrest;	1
My thoughts and my discourse as madmen's are,	1
At random from the truth vainly express'd;	1
For I have sworn thee fair and thought thee bright,	1
Who art as black as hell, as dark as night.	1

O me, what eyes hath Love put in my head,	1
Which have no correspondence with true sight!	1
Or, if they have, where is my judgment fled,	1
That censures falsely what they see aright?	1
If that be fair whereon my false eyes dote,	1
What means the world to say it is not so?	1
If it be not, then love doth well denote	1
Love's eye is not so true as all men's 'No.'	1
How can it? O, how can Love's eye be true,	1
That is so vex'd with watching and with tears?	1
No marvel then, though I mistake my view;	1
The sun itself sees not till heaven clears.	1
O cunning Love! with tears thou keep'st me blind,	1
Lest eyes well-seeing thy foul faults should find.	1

Canst thou, O cruel! say I love thee not,	1
When I against myself with thee partake?	1
Do I not think on thee, when I forgot	1
Am of myself, all tyrant, for thy sake?	1
Who hateth thee that I do call my friend?	1
On whom frown'st thou that I do fawn upon?	1
Nay, if thou lour'st on me, do I not spend	1
Revenge upon myself with present moan?	1
What merit do I in myself respect,	1
That is so proud thy service to despise,	1
When all my best doth worship thy defect,	1
Commanded by the motion of thine eyes?	1
But, love, hate on, for now I know thy mind;	1
Those that can see thou lovest, and I am blind.	1

O, from what power hast thou this powerful might	1
With insufficiency my heart to sway?	1
To make me give the lie to my true sight,	1
And swear that brightness doth not grace the day?	1
Whence hast thou this becoming of things ill,	1
That in the very refuse of thy deeds	1
There is such strength and warrantize of skill	1
That, in my mind, thy worst all best exceeds?	1
Who taught thee how to make me love thee more	1
The more I hear and see just cause of hate?	1
O, though I love what others do abhor,	1
With others thou shouldst not abhor my state:	1
If thy unworthiness raised love in me,	1
More worthy I to be beloved of thee.	1

Love is too young to know what conscience is;	1
Yet who knows not conscience is born of love?	1
Then, gentle cheater, urge not my amiss,	1
Lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove:	1
For, thou betraying me, I do betray	1
My nobler part to my gross body's treason;	1
My soul doth tell my body that he may	1
Triumph in love; flesh stays no father reason;	1
But, rising at thy name, doth point out thee	1
As his triumphant prize. Proud of this pride,	1
He is contented thy poor drudge to be,	1
To stand in thy affairs, fall by thy side.	1
No want of conscience hold it that I call	1
Her 'love' for whose dear love I rise and fall.	1

In loving thee thou know'st I am forsworn,	1
But thou art twice forsworn, to me love swearing,	1
In act thy bed-vow broke and new faith torn,	1
In vowing new hate after new love bearing.	1
But why of two oaths' breach do I accuse thee,	1
When I break twenty? I am perjured most;	1
For all my vows are oaths but to misuse thee	1
And all my honest faith in thee is lost,	1
For I have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness,	1
Oaths of thy love, thy truth, thy constancy,	1
And, to enlighten thee, gave eyes to blindness,	1
Or made them swear against the thing they see;	1
For I have sworn thee fair; more perjured I,	1
To swear against the truth so foul a lie!	1

Cupid laid by his brand, and fell asleep:	1
A maid of Dian's this advantage found,	1
And his love-kindling fire did quickly steep	1
In a cold valley-fountain of that ground;	1
Which borrow'd from this holy fire of Love	1
A dateless lively heat, still to endure,	1
And grew a seething bath, which yet men prove	1
Against strange maladies a sovereign cure.	1
But at my mistress' eye Love's brand new-fired,	1
The boy for trial needs would touch my breast;	1
I, sick withal, the help of bath desired,	1
And thither hied, a sad distemper'd guest,	1
But found no cure: the bath for my help lies	1
Where Cupid got new fire--my mistress' eyes.	1

The little Love-god lying once asleep	1
Laid by his side his heart-inflaming brand,	1
Whilst many nymphs that vow'd chaste life to keep	1
Came tripping by; but in her maiden hand	1
The fairest votary took up that fire	1
Which many legions of true hearts had warm'd;	1
And so the general of hot desire	1
Was sleeping by a virgin hand disarm'd.	1
This brand she quenched in a cool well by,	1
Which from Love's fire took heat perpetual,	1
Growing a bath and healthful remedy	1
For men diseased; but I, my mistress' thrall,	1
Came there for cure, and this by that I prove,	1
Love's fire heats water, water cools not love.	1

