, hearts all with endeared is bosom Thy
, dead supposed have lacking by I Which
, parts loving 's love all and love reigns there And
. buried thought I which friends those all And
tear obsequious and holy a many How
eye mine from n ' stol love religious dear Hath
appear now which , dead the of interest As
! lie thee in hidden that removed things But
, live doth love buried where grave the art Thou
, gone lovers my of trophies the with Hung
; give did thee to me of parts their all Who
: alone thine is now many of due That
, thee in view I loved I images Their
. me of all the all hast , they all , thou And

, day well-contented my survive thou If
, cover shall dust with bones my Death churl that When
re-survey more once fortune by shalt And
, lover deceased thy of lines rude poor These
, time the of bettering the with them Compare
, pen every by 'd outstripp be they though And
, rhyme their for not , love my for them Reserve
. men happier of height the by Exceeded
: thought loving this but me vouchsafe then , O
, age growing this with grown Muse 's friend my 'Had
, brought had love his this than birth dearer A
: equipage better of ranks in march To
, prove better poets and died he since But
' . love his for his , read 'll I style their for Theirs

seen I have morning glorious a many Full
, eye sovereign with mountain-tops the Flatter
, green meadows the face golden with Kissing
; alchemy heavenly with streams pale Gilding
ride to clouds basest the permit Anon
, face celestial his on rack ugly With
, hide visage his world forlorn the from And
: disgrace this with west to unseen Stealing
shine did morn early one sun my so Even
; brow my on splendor triumphant all With
; mine hour one but was he ! alack , out But
. now me from him 'd mask hath cloud region The
; disdaineth whit no love my this for him Yet
. staineth sun 's heaven when stain may world the of Suns

, day beauteous a such promise thou didst Why
, cloak my without forth travel me make And
, way my in me o'ertake clouds base let To
? smoke rotten their in bravery thy Hiding
, break thou cloud the through that enough not is 'T
, face storm-beaten my on rain the dry To
speak can salve a such of well man no For
: disgrace the not cures and wound the heals That
; grief my to physic give shame thy can Nor
: loss the still have I yet , repent thou Though
relief weak but lends sorrow 's offender The
. cross 's offence strong the bears that him To
, sheds love thy which pearl are tears those but ! Ah
. deeds ill all ransom and rich are they And

: done hast thou which that at grieved be more No
; mud fountains silver and , thorns have Roses
, sun and moon both stain eclipses and Clouds
. bud sweetest in lives canker loathsome And
, this in I even and , faults make men All
, compare with trespass thy Authorizing
, amiss thy salving , corrupting Myself
; are sins thy than more sins thy Excusing
-- sense in bring I fault sensual thy to For
-- advocate thy is party adverse Thy
: commence plea lawful a myself 'gainst And
hate and love my in is war civil Such
be must needs accessary an I That
. me from robs sourly which thief sweet that To

, twain be must two we that confess me Let
: one are loves undivided our Although
remain me with do that blots those shall So
. alone borne be me by help thy Without
, respect one but is there loves two our In
, spite separable a lives our in Though
, effect sole 's love not alter it though Which
. delight 's love from hours sweet steal it doth Yet
, thee acknowledge evermore not may I
, shame thee do should guilt bewailed my Lest
, me honour kindness public with thou Nor
: name thy from honour that take thou Unless
sort such in thee love I ; so not do But
. report good thy is mine , mine being thou , As

delight takes father decrepit a As
, youth of deeds do child active his see To
, spite dearest 's fortune by lame made , I So
. truth and worth thy of comfort my all Take
, wit or , wealth or , birth , beauty whether For
, more or , all or , all these of any Or
, sit crowned do parts thy in Entitled
: store this to engrafted love my make I
, despised nor , poor , lame not am I then So
give substance such doth shadow this that Whilst
sufficed am abundance thy in I That
. live glory thy all of part a by And
: thee in wish I best that , best is what , Look
! me happy times ten then ; have I wish This

, invent to subject want Muse my can How
verse my into pour'st that , breathe dost thou While
excellent too , argument sweet own Thine
? rehearse to paper vulgar every For
me in aught if , thanks the thyself give , O
; sight thy against stand perusal Worthy
, thee to write not can that dumb so 's who For
? light invention give dost thyself thou When
worth in more times ten , Muse tenth the thou Be
; invocate rhymers which nine old those Than
forth bring him let , thee on calls that he And
. date long outlive to numbers Eternal
, days curious these please do Muse slight my If
. praise the be shall thine but , mine be pain The

, sing I may manners with worth thy how , O
? me of part better the all art thou When
? bring self own mine to praise own mine can What
? thee praise I when own mine but 't is what And
, live divided us let this for Even
, one single of name lose love dear our And
give may I separation this by That
. alone deservest thou which thee to due That
, prove thou wouldst torment a what , absence O
leave sweet gave leisure sour thy not it Were
, love of thoughts with time the entertain To
, deceive doth sweetly so thoughts and time Which
, twain one make to how teachest thou that And
! remain hence doth who here him praising By

; all them take , yea , love my , loves my all Take
? before hadst thou than more then thou hast What
; call love true mayst thou that , love my , love No
. more this hadst thou before thine was mine All
, receivest love my thou love my for if Then
; usest thou love my for thee blame not can I
deceivest thyself thou if , blamed be yet But
. refusest thyself what of taste wilful By
, thief gentle , robbery thy forgive do I
; poverty my all thee steal thou Although
grief greater a is it , knows love , yet And
. injury known 's hate than wrong 's love bear To
, shows well ill all whom in , grace Lascivious
. foes be not must we yet ; spites with me Kill

, commits liberty that wrongs petty Those
, heart thy from absent sometime am I When
, befits well full years thy and beauty Thy
. art thou where follows temptation still For
, won be to therefore and art thou Gentle
; assailed be to therefore , art thou Beauteous
son 's woman what , woos woman a when And
? prevailed have she till her leave sourly Will
, forbear seat my mightest thou yet but ! me Ay
, youth straying thy and beauty try chide And
there even riot their in thee lead Who
, truth twofold a break to forced art thou Where
, thee to her tempting beauty thy by Hers
. me to false being beauty thy by , Thine

, grief my all not is it , her hast thou That
; dearly her loved I said be may it yet And
, chief wailing my of is , thee hath she That
. nearly more me touches that love in loss A
: ye excuse will I thus , offenders Loving
; her love I knowst thou because , her love dost Thou
, me abuse she doth so even sake my for And
. her approve to sake my for friend my Suffering
, gain 's love my is loss my , thee lose I If
; loss that found hath friend my , her losing And
, twain both lose I and , other each find Both
: cross this me on lay sake my for both And
; one are I and friend my ; joy the 's here But
. alone me but loves she then ! flattery Sweet

, see best eyes mine do then , wink I most When
; unrespected things view they day the all For
, thee on look they dreams in , sleep I when But
. directed dark in bright are bright darkly And
, bright make doth shadows shadow whose , thou Then
show happy form form 's shadow thy would How
, light clearer much thy with day clear the To
! so shines shade thy eyes unseeing to When
made blessed be eyes mine , say I , would How
, day living the in thee on looking By
shade imperfect fair thy night dead in When
! stay doth eyes sightless on sleep heavy Through
, thee see I till see to nights are days All
. me thee show do dreams when days bright nights And

, thought were flesh my of substance dull the If
; way my stop not should distance Injurious
, brought be would I space of despite then For
. stay dost thou where remote far limits From
stand did foot my although then matter No
; thee from removed earth farthest the Upon
land and sea both jump can thought nimble For
. be would he where place the think as soon As
, thought not am I that me kills thought ! ah But
, gone art thou when miles of lengths large leap To
wrought water and earth of much so that But
, moan my with leisure 's time attend must I
slow so elements by nought Receiving
. woe 's either of badges , tears heavy But

, fire purging and air slight , two other The
; abide I wherever , thee with both Are
, desire my other the , thought my first The
. slide motion swift with present-absent These
gone are elements quicker these when For
, thee to love of embassy tender In
alone two with , four of made being , life My
; melancholy with 'd oppress , death to down Sinks
recured be composition 's life Until
, thee from 'd return messengers swift those By
assured , again back come now but even Who
: me to it recounting , health fair thy Of
, glad longer no then but ; joy I , told This
. sad grow straight and again back them send I

war mortal a at are heart and eye Mine
; sight thy of conquest the divide to How
, bar would sight 's picture thy heart my eye Mine
. right that of freedom the eye mine heart My
-- lie dost him in thou that plead doth heart My
-- eyes crystal with pierced never closet A
deny plea that doth defendant the But
. lies appearance fair thy him in says And
impanneled is title this 'cide To
, heart the to tenants all , thoughts of quest A
determined is verdict their by And
: part 's heart dear the and moiety 's eye clear The
, part outward thy is due 's eye mine ; thus As
. heart of love inward thy right 's heart my And

, took is league a heart and eye mine Betwixt
: other the unto now turns good doth each And
, look a for 'd famish is eye mine that When
, smother doth himself sighs with love in heart Or
feast doth eye my then picture 's love my With
; heart my bids banquet painted the to And
guest 's heart my is eye mine time Another
: part a share doth love of thoughts his in And
, love my or picture thy by either , So
; me with still resent art away Thyself
, move canst thoughts my than farther not thou For
; thee with they and them with still am I And
sight my in picture thy , sleep they if , Or
. delight 's eye and 's heart to heart my Awakes

, way my took I when , I was careful How
, thrust to bars truest under trifle Each
stay unused might it use my to That
! trust of wards sure in , falsehood of hands From
, are trifles jewels my whom to , thou But
, grief greatest my now , comfort of worthy Most
, care only mine and dearest of best , Thou
. thief vulgar every of prey the left Art
, chest any in up 'd lock not I have Thee
, art thou feel I though , not art thou where Save
, breast my of closure gentle the Within
; part and come mayst thou pleasure at whence From
, fear I , n ' stol be wilt thou thence even And
. dear so prize a for thievish proves truth For

, come time that ever if , time that Against
, defects my on frown thee see shall I When
, sum utmost his cast hath love thy as When
; respects advised by audit that to 'd Call
pass strangely shalt thou when time that Against
, eye thine sun that with me greet scarcely And
, was it thing the from converted , love When
-- , gravity settled of find reasons Shall
here me ensconce I do time that Against
, desert own mine of knowledge the Within
, uprear myself against hand my this And
: part thy on reasons lawful the guard To
, laws of strength the hast thou me poor leave To
. cause no allege can I love to why Since

, way the on journey I do heavy How
, end 's travel weary my , seek I what When
say to repose that and ease that teach Doth
' ! friend thy from measured are miles the far 'Thus
, woe my with tired , me bears that beast The
, me in weight that bear to , on dully Plods
know did wretch the instinct some by if As
: thee from made being , speed not loved rider His
on him provoke not can spur bloody The
; hide his into thrusts anger sometimes That
, groan a with answers he heavily Which
; side his to spurring than me to sharp More
; mind my in this put doth groan same that For
. behind joy my and onward lies grief My

offence slow the excuse love my can Thus
: speed I thee from when bearer dull my Of
? thence me haste I should why art thou where From
. need no is posting of , return I Till
, find then beast poor my will excuse what , O
? slow but seem can extremity swift When
; wind the on mounted though , spur I should Then
: know I shall motion no speed winged In
; pace keep desire my with horse no can Then
, made being love perfect'st of desire Therefore
; race fiery his in -- flesh dull no -- neigh Shall
; jade my excuse shall thus , love for , love But
, wilful-slow went he going thee from Since
. go to leave him give and , run 'll I thee Towards

key blessed whose , rich the as I am So
, treasure up-locked sweet his to him bring Can
, survey hour every not will he which The
. pleasure seldom of point fine the blunting For
, rare so and solemn so feasts are Therefore
, set year long the in , coming seldom , Since
, are placed thinly they worth of stones Like
. carcanet the in jewels captain Or
, chest my as you keeps that time the is So
, hide doth robe the which wardrobe the as Or
, blest special instant special some make To
. pride 'd imprison his unfolding new By
, scope gives worthiness whose , you are Blessed
. hope to , 'd lack being , triumph to , had Being

, made you are whereof , substance your is What
? tend you on shadows strange of millions That
, shade one , one every , hath one every Since
. lend shadow every can , one but , you And
counterfeit the and , Adonis Describe
; you after imitated poorly Is
, set beauty of art all cheek 's Helen On
: new painted are tires Grecian in you And
; year the of foison and spring the of Speak
, show beauty your of shadow doth one The
; appear doth bounty your as other The
. know we shape blessed every in you And
, part some have you grace external all In
. heart constant for , you none , none like you But

seem beauteous beauty doth more much how , O
! give doth truth which ornament sweet that By
deem it we fairer but , fair looks rose The
. live it in doth which odour sweet that For
dye a deep as full have canker-blooms The
, roses the of tincture perfumed the As
wantonly as play and thorns such on Hang
: discloses buds masked their breath 's summer When
, show their is only virtue their for , But
, fade unrespected and 'd unwoo live They
; so not do roses Sweet . themselves to Die
: made odours sweetest are deaths sweet their Of
, youth lovely and beauteous , you of so And
. truth your distills verse my , fade shall that When

monuments gilded the nor , marble Not
; rhyme powerful this outlive shall , princes Of
contents these in bright more shine shall you But
. time sluttish with 'd besmear stone unswept Than
, overturn statues shall war wasteful When
, masonry of work the out root broils And
burn shall fire quick 's war nor sword his Mars Nor
. memory your of record living The
enmity all-oblivious and death 'Gainst
room find still shall praise your ; forth pace you Shall
posterity all of eyes the in Even
. doom ending the to out world this wear That
, arise yourself that judgment the till , So
. eyes 's lover in dwell and , this in live You

said not it be ; force thy renew , love Sweet
, appetite than be blunter should edge Thy
, 'd allay is feeding by to-day but Which
: might former his in 'd sharpen To-morrow
fill thou to-day although ; thou be , love , So
, fullness with wink they till even eyes hungry Thy
kill not do and , again see To-morrow
. dullness perpetual a with love of spirit The
be ocean the like interim sad this Let
new contracted two where , shore the parts Which
see they when , that , banks the to daily Come
; view the be may blest more , love of Return
care of full being which , winter it call Else
. rare more , 'd wish more thrice welcome 's summer Makes

tend but do I should what , slave your Being
? desire your of times and hours the Upon
, spend to all at time precious no have I
. require you till , do to services Nor
hour world-without-end the chide I dare Nor
, you for clock the watch , sovereign my , I Whilst
sour absence of bitterness the think Nor
; adieu once servant your bid have you When
thought jealous my with question I dare Nor
, suppose affairs your or , be may you Where
nought of think and stay , slave sad a like , But
. those make you happy how are you where , Save
, will your in that love is fool a true So
. ill no thinks he , thing any do you Though

, slave your first me made that forbid god That
, pleasure of times your control thought in should I
, crave to hours of account the hand your at Or
! leisure your stay to bound , vassal your Being
, beck your at being , suffer me let , O
; liberty your of absence 'd imprison The
, cheque each bide , sufferance to tame , patience And
. injury of you accusing Without
strong so is charter your , list you where Be
time your privilege may yourself you That
belong doth it you to ; will you what To
. crime self-doing of pardon to Yourself
; hell be so waiting though , wait to am I
. well or ill it be , pleasure your blame Not

is which that but , new nothing be there If
, beguiled brains our are how , before been Hath
amiss bear , invention for labouring , Which
! child former a of burden second The
, look backward a with could record that , O
, sun the of courses hundred five of Even
, book antique some in image your me Show
! done was character in first at mind Since
say could world old the what see might I That
; frame your of wonder composed this To
, they better whether or , mended are we Whether
. same the be revolution whether Or
days former of wits the , am I sure , O
. praise admiring given have worse subjects To

, shore pebbled the towards make waves the as Like
; end their to hasten minutes our do So
, before goes which that with place changing Each
. contend do forwards all toil sequent In
, light of main the in once , Nativity
, 'd crown being wherewith , maturity to Crawls
, fight glory his 'gainst elipses Crooked
. confound gift his now doth gave that Time And
youth on set flourish the transfix doth Time
, brow 's beauty in parallels the delves And
, truth 's nature of rarities the on Feeds
: mow to scythe his for but stands nothing And
, stand shall verse my hope in times to yet And
. hand cruel his despite , worth thy Praising

open keep should image thy will thy it Is
? night weary the to eyelids heavy My
, broken be should slumbers my desire thou Dost
? sight my mock do thee to like shadows While
thee from send'st thou that spirit thy it Is
, pry to deeds my into home from far So
, me in hours idle and shames out find To
? jealousy thy of tenor and scope The
: great so not is , much though , love thy ! no , O
; awake eye mine keeps that love my is It
, defeat rest my doth that love true own Mine
: sake thy for ever watchman the play To
, elsewhere wake dost thou whilst I watch thee For
. near too all others with , off far me From

eye mine all possesseth self-love of Sin
; part every my all and soul my all And
, remedy no is there sin this for And
. heart my in inward grounded so is It
, mine as is gracious so face no Methinks
; account such of truth no , true so shape No
, define do worth own mine myself for And
. surmount worths all in other all I As
, indeed myself me shows glass my when But
, antiquity 'd tann with 'd chopp and Beated
; read I contrary quite self-love own Mine
. iniquity were self-loving so Self
, praise I myself for that , myself , thee is 'T
. days thy of beauty with age my Painting

, now am I as , be shall love my Against
; o'er-worn and 'd crush hand injurious 's Time With
brow his 'd fill and blood his 'd drain have hours When
morn youthful his when ; wrinkles and lines With
, night steepy 's age to on 'd travell Hath
king 's he now whereof beauties those all And
, sight of out 'd vanish or vanishing Are
; spring his of treasure the away Stealing
fortify now I do time a such For
, knife cruel 's age confounding Against
memory from cut never shall he That
: life 's lover my though , beauty 's love sweet My
, seen be lines black these in shall beauty His
. green still them in he and , live shall they And

defaced hand fell 's Time by seen have I When
; age buried outworn of cost proud rich The
down-razed see I towers lofty sometime When
; rage mortal to slave eternal brass And
gain ocean hungry the seen have I When
, shore the of kingdom the on Advantage
, main watery the of win soil firm the And
; store with loss and loss with store Increasing
, state of interchange such seen have I When
; decay to confounded itself state Or
, ruminate to thus me taught hath Ruin
. away love my take and come will Time That
choose not can which , death a as is thought This
. lose to fears it which that have to weep But

, sea boundless nor , earth nor , stone nor , brass Since
, power their o'er-sways mortality sad But
, plea a hold beauty shall rage this with How
? flower a than stronger no is action Whose
out hold breath honey 's summer shall how , O
, days battering of siege wreckful the Against
, stout so not are impregnable rocks When
? decays Time but , strong so steel of gates Nor
, alack , where ! meditation fearful O
? hid lie chest 's Time from jewel best 's Time Shall
? back foot swift his hold can hand strong what Or
? forbid can beauty of spoil his who Or
, might have miracle this unless , none , O
. bright shine still may love my ink black in That

, cry I death restful for , these all with Tired
, born beggar a desert behold to , As
, jollity in 'd trimm nothing needy And
, forsworn unhappily faith purest And
, misplaced shamefully honour guilded And
, strumpeted rudely virtue maiden And
, disgraced wrongfully perfection right And
, disabled sway limping by strength And
, authority by tongue-tied made art And
, skill controlling doctor-like folly And
, simplicity 'd miscall truth simple And
: ill captain attending good captive And
, gone be I would these from , these all with Tired
. alone love my leave I , die to , that Save

, live he should infection with wherefore ! Ah
, impiety grace presence his with And
achieve should advantage him by sin That
? society his with itself lace And
cheek his imitate painting false should Why
? hue living his of seeing dead steal And
seek indirectly beauty poor should Why
? true is rose his since , shadow of Roses
, is bankrupt Nature now , live he should Why
? veins lively through blush to blood of 'd Beggar
, his but now exchequer no hath she For
. gains his upon lives , many of proud , And
had she wealth what show to , stores she him , O
. bad so last these before , since long days In

, outworn days of map the cheek his is Thus
, now do flowers as died and lived beauty When
, born were fair of signs bastard the Before
; brow living a on inhabit durst Or
, dead the of tresses golden the Before
, away shorn were , sepulchres of right The
; head second on life second a live To
: gay another made fleece dead 's beauty Ere
, seen are hours antique holy those him In
, true and itself , ornament all Without
, green 's another of summer no Making
; new beauty his dress to old no Robbing
, store Nature doth map a for as him And
. yore of was beauty what Art false show To

view doth eye 's world the that thee of parts Those
; mend can hearts of thought the that nothing Want
, due that thee give , souls of voice the , tongues All
. commend foes as so even , truth bare Uttering
; 'd crown is praise outward with thus outward Thy
own thine so thee give that tongues same those But
confound praise this do accents other In
. shown hath eye the than farther seeing By
, mind thy of beauty the into look They
; deeds thy by measure they , guess in , that And
, kind were eyes their although , thoughts their , churls , Then
: weeds of smell rank the add flower fair thy To
, show thy not matcheth odour thy why But
. grow common dost thou that , this is solve The

, defect thy be not shall blamed art thou That
; fair the yet ever was mark 's slander For
, suspect is beauty of ornament The
. air sweetest 's heaven in flies that crow A
approve but doth slander , good be thou So
; time of 'd woo being , greater the worth Thy
, love doth buds sweetest the vice canker For
. prime unstained pure a present'st thou And
, days young of ambush the by 'd pass hast Thou
; charged being victor or 'd assail not Either
, praise thy so be not can praise thy this Yet
: enlarged evermore envy up tie To
, show thy not 'd mask ill of suspect some If
. owe shouldst hearts of kingdoms alone thou Then

dead am I when me for mourn longer No
bell sullen surly the hear shall you Then
fled am I that world the to warning Give
: dwell to worms vilest with , world vile this From
not remember , line this read you if , Nay
so you love I for ; it writ that hand The
forgot be would thoughts sweet your in I That
. woe you make should then me on thinking If
verse this upon look you , say I , if , O
, clay with am compounded perhaps I When
. rehearse name poor my as much so not Do
, decay life my with even love your let But
moan your into look should world wise the Lest
. gone am I after me with you mock And

recite to you task should world the lest , O
love should you that , me in lived merit What
, quite me forget , love dear , death my After
; prove worthy nothing can me in you For
, lie virtuous some devise would you Unless
, desert own mine than me for more do To
I deceased upon praise more hang And
: impart willingly would truth niggard Than
, this in false seem may love true your lest , O
, untrue me of well speak love for you That
, is body my where buried be name My
. you nor me nor shame to more no live And
, forth bring I which that by shamed am I For
. worth nothing things love to , you should so And

behold me in mayst thou year of time That
hang do , few or , none or , leaves yellow When
, cold the against shake which boughs those Upon
. sang birds sweet the late where , choirs 'd ruin Bare
day such of twilight the seest thou me In
, west the in fadeth sunset after As
, away take doth night black by and by Which
. rest in all up seals that , self second 's Death
fire such of glowing the see'st thou me In
, lie doth youth his of ashes the on That
expire must it whereon death-bed the As
. by 'd nourish was it which that with Consumed
, strong more love thy makes which , perceivest thou This
. long ere leave must thou which well that love To

arrest fell that when : contented be But
, away me carry shall bail all Without
, interest some line this in hath life My
. stay shall thee with still memorial for Which
review dost thou , this reviewest thou When
: thee to consecrate was part very The
; due his is which , earth but have can earth The
: me of part better the , thine is spirit My
, life of dregs the lost but hast thou then So
, dead being body my , worms of prey The
, knife 's wretch a of conquest coward The
. remembered be to thee of base Too
, contains it which that is that of worth The
. remains thee with this and , this is that And

, life to food as thoughts my to you are So
; ground the to are showers 'd sweet-season as Or
strife such hold I you of peace the for And
; found is wealth his and miser a 'twixt As
anon and enjoyer an as proud Now
, treasure his steal will age filching the Doubting
, alone you with be to best counting Now
; pleasure my see may world the that 'd better Then
sight your on feasting with full all Sometime
; look a for starved clean by and by And
, delight no pursuing or Possessing
. took be you from must or had is what Save
, day by day surfeit and pine I do Thus
. away all or , all on gluttoning Or

, pride new of barren so verse my is Why
? change quick or variation from far So
aside glance not I do time the with Why
? strange compounds to and methods new-found To
, same the ever , one all still I write Why
, weed noted a in invention keep And
, name my tell almost doth word every That
? proceed did they where and birth their Showing
, you of write always I , love sweet , know , O
; argument my still are love and you And
, new words old dressing is best my all So
: spent already is what again Spending
, old and new daily is sun the as For
. told is what telling still love my is So

, wear beauties thy how thee show will glass Thy
; waste minutes precious thy how dial Thy
, bear will imprint 's mind thy leaves vacant The
. taste thou mayst learning this book this of And
show truly will glass thy which wrinkles The
; memory thee give will graves mouthed Of
know mayst stealth shady 's dial thy by Thou
. eternity to progress thievish 's Time
contain not can memory thy what , Look
find shalt thou and , blanks waste these to Commit
, brain thy from 'd deliver , nursed children Those
. mind thy of acquaintance new a take To
, look wilt thou as oft so , offices These
. book thy enrich much and thee profit Shall

Muse my for thee invoked I have oft So
verse my in assistance fair such found And
use my got hath pen alien every As
. disperse poesy their thee under And
sing to high on dumb the taught that eyes Thine
fly to aloft ignorance heavy And
wing 's learned the to feathers added Have
. majesty double a grace given And
, compile I which that of proud most be Yet
: thee of born and thine is influence Whose
, style the mend but dost thou works ' others In
; be graced graces sweet thy with arts And
advance dost and art my all art thou But
. ignorance rude my learning as high As

, aid thy upon call did alone I Whilst
, grace gentle thy all had alone verse My
'd decay are numbers gracious my now But
. place another give doth Muse sick my And
argument lovely thy , love sweet , grant I
, pen worthier a of travail the Deserves
invent doth poet thy thee of what Yet
. again thee it pays and of thee robs He
word that stole he and virtue thee lends He
give he doth beauty ; behavior thy From
afford can he ; cheek thy in it found And
. live doth thee in what but thee to praise No
, say doth he which that for not him thank Then
. pay dost thyself thou thee owes he what Since

, write do you of I when faint I how , O
, name your use doth spirit better a Knowing
, might his all spends thereof praise the in And
! fame your of speaking , tongue-tied me make To
, is ocean the as wide , worth your since But
, bear doth sail proudest the as humble The
his to far inferior bark saucy My
. appear wilfully doth main broad your On
, afloat up me hold will help shallowest Your
; ride doth deep soundless your upon he Whilst
, boat worthless a am I , 'd wreck being Or
: pride goodly of and building tall of He
, away cast be I and thrive he if Then
. decay my was love my ; this was worst The

, make to epitaph your live shall I Or
; rotten am earth in I when survive you Or
, take not can death memory your hence From
. forgotten be will part each me in Although
, have shall life immortal hence from name Your
: die must world the all to , gone once , I Though
, grave common a but me yield can earth The
. lie shall eyes 's men in entombed you When
, verse gentle my be shall monument Your
, o'er-read shall created yet not eyes Which
rehearse shall being your be to tongues And
; dead are world this of breathers the all When
-- pen my hath virtue such -- live shall still You
. men of mouths the in even , breathes most breath Where

Muse my to married not wert thou grant I
o'erlook attaint without mayst therefore And
use writers which words dedicated The
book every blessing , subject fair their Of
, hue in as knowledge in fair as art Thou
, praise my past limit a worth thy Finding
anew seek to enforced art therefore And
days time-bettering the of stamp fresher Some
devised have they when yet ; love , so do And
, lend can rhetoric touches strained What
sympathized truly wert fair truly Thou
; friend true-telling thy by words plain true In
used better be might painting gross their And
. abused is it thee in ; blood need cheeks Where

need painting did you that saw never I
; set painting no fair your to therefore And
exceed did you , found I thought or , found I
; debt 's poet a of tender barren The
, report your in slept I have therefore And
show might well extant being yourself you That
, short too come doth quill modern a far How
. grow doth you in worth what , worth of Speaking
, impute did you sin my for silence This
; dumb being , glory my most be shall Which
, mute being beauty not impair I For
. tomb a bring and life give would others When
eyes fair your of one in life more lives There
. devise praise in can poets your both Than

more say can which ? most says that it is Who
? you are alone you that , praise rich this Than
store the is immured confine whose In
. grew equal your where example should Which
dwell doth pen that within penury Lean
; glory small some not lends subject his to That
tell can he if , you of writes that he But
, story his dignifies so , you are you That
, writ is you in what copy but him Let
, clear so made nature what worse making Not
, wit his fame shall counterpart a such And
. where every admired style his Making
, curse a add blessings beauteous your to You
. worse praises your makes which , praise on fond Being

, still her holds manners in Muse tongue-tied My
, compiled richly , praise your of comments While
quill golden with character their Reserve
. filed Muses the all by phrase precious And
, words good write other whilst thoughts good think I
' 'Amen cry still clerk 'd unletter like And
affords spirit able that hymn every To
. pen well-refined of form 'd polish In
' , true is 't , so is 'T say I , praised you Hearing
; more something add praise of most the to And
, you to love whose , thought my in is that But
. before rank his holds , hindmost come words Though
, respect words of breath the for others Then
. effect in speaking , thoughts dumb my for Me

, verse great his of sail full proud the it Was
, you precious too all of prize the for Bound
, inhearse brain my in thoughts ripe my did That
? grew they wherein womb the tomb their Making
write to taught spirits by , spirit his it Was
? dead me struck that , pitch mortal a Above
night by compeers his nor , he neither , No
. astonished verse my , aid him Giving
ghost familiar affable that nor , He
intelligence with him gulls nightly Which
; boast not can silence my of victors As
: thence from fear any of sick not was I
, line his up 'd fill countenance your when But
. mine enfeebled that ; matter I 'd lack Then

, possessing my for dear too art thou ! Farewell
: estimate thy know'st thou enough like And
; releasing thee gives worth thy of charter The
. determinate all are thee in bonds My
? granting thy by but thee hold I do how For
? deserving my is where riches that for And
, wanting is me in gift fair this of cause The
. swerving is again back patent my so And
, knowing not then worth own thy , gavest thou Thyself
; mistaking else , it gavest thou whom to , me Or
, growing misprision upon , gift great thy So
. making judgment better on , again home Comes
, flatter doth dream a as , thee had I have Thus
. matter such no waking but , king a sleep In

, light me set to disposed be shalt thou When
, scorn of eye the in merit my place And
, fight 'll I myself against side thy Upon
. forsworn art thou though , virtuous thee prove And
, acquainted best being weakness own mine With
story a down set can I part thy Upon
, attainted am I wherein , 'd conceal faults Of
: glory much win shalt me losing in thou That
; too gainer a be will this by I And
, thee on thoughts loving my all bending For
, do I myself to that injuries The
. me double-vantage , vantage thee Doing
, belong so I thee to , love my is Such
. wrong all bear will myself right thy for That

, fault some for me forsake didst thou that Say
; offence that upon comment will I And
, halt will straight I and , lameness my of Speak
. defence no making reasons thy Against
, ill so half me disgrace , love , not canst Thou
, change desired upon form a set To
, will thy knowing : disgrace myself 'll I As
, strange look and strangle acquaintance will I
tongue my in and , walks thy from absent Be
, dwell shall more no name beloved sweet Thy
wrong it do should , profane much too , I Lest
. tell acquaintance old our of haply And
, debate vow 'll I myself against thee For
. hate dost thou whom him love ne'er must I For

; now , ever if ; wilt thou when me hate Then
, cross to deeds my bent is world the while , Now
, bow me make , fortune of spite the with Join
: after-loss an for in drop not do And
, sorrow this 'scoped hath heart my when , not do , Ah
; woe 'd conquer a of rearward the in Come
, morrow rainy a night windy a not Give
. overthrow purposed a out linger To
, last me leave not do , me leave wilt thou If
spite their done have griefs petty other When
taste I shall so ; come onset the in But
, might 's fortune of worst very the first At
, woe seem now which , woe of strains other And
. so seem not will thee of loss with Compared

, skill their in some , birth their in glory Some
, force ' bodies their in some , wealth their in Some
, ill new-fangled though , garments their in Some
; horse their in some , hounds and hawks their in Some
, pleasure adjunct his hath humour every And
: rest the above joy a finds it Wherein
; measure my not are particulars these But
. best general one in better I these All
, me to birth high than better is love Thy
, cost ' garments than prouder , wealth than Richer
; be horses or hawks than delight more Of
: boast I pride 's men all of , thee having And
take mayst thou that , alone this in Wretched
. make wretched most me and away this All

, away thyself steal to worst thy do But
, mine assured art thou life of term For
, stay will love thy than longer no life And
. thine of love that upon depends it For
, wrongs of worst the fear to not I need Then
. end hath life my them of least the in When
belongs me to state better a see I
; depend doth humour thy on which that Than
, mind inconstant with me vex not canst Thou
. lie doth revolt thy on life my that Since
, find I do title happy a what , O
! die to happy , love thy have to Happy
? blot no fears that blessed-fair so 's what But
. not it know I yet and , false be mayst Thou

, true art thou supposing , live I shall So
face 's love so ; husband deceived a Like
; new 'd alter though , me to love seem still May
: place other in heart thy , me with looks Thy
, eye thine in hatred no live can there For
. change thy know not can I that in Therefore
history 's heart false the looks 's many In
, strange wrinkles and frowns and moods in writ Is
decree did creation thy in heaven But
; dwell ever should love sweet face thy in That
, be workings 's heart thy or thoughts thy Whate'er
. tell sweetness but thence nothing should looks Thy
, grow beauty thy doth apple 's Eve like How
! show thy not answer virtue sweet thy if

, none do will and hurt to power have that They
, show do most they thing the do not do That
, stone as themselves are , others moving , Who
, slow temptation to and , cold , Unmoved
graces 's heaven inherit do rightly They
; expense from riches 's nature husband And
, faces their of owners and lords the are They
. excellence their of stewards but Others
, sweet summer the to is flower 's summer The
, die and live only it itself to Though
, meet infection base with flower that if But
: dignity his outbraves weed basest The
; deeds their by sourest turn things sweetest For
. weeds than worse far smell fester that Lilies

shame the make thou dost lovely and sweet How
, rose fragrant the in canker a like , Which
! name budding thy of beauty the spot Doth
! enclose sins thy thou dost sweets what in , O
, days thy of story the tells that tongue That
, sport thy on comments lascivious Making
; praise of kind a in but dispraise not Can
. report ill an blesses name thy Naming
got vices those have mansion a what , O
, thee out chose habitation their for Which
, blot every cover doth veil 's beauty Where
! see can eyes that fair to turn things all And
; privilege large this of , heart dear , heed Take
. edge his lose doth ill-used knife hardest The

; wantonness some , youth is fault thy say Some
; sport gentle and youth is grace thy say Some
; less and more of loved are faults and grace Both
. resort thee to that graces faults makest Thou
queen throned a of finger the on As
, 'd esteem well be will jewel basest The
seen are thee in that errors those are So
. 'd deem things true for and translated truths To
, betray wolf stem the might lambs many How
! translate looks his could he lamb a like If
, away lead thou mightst gazers many How
! state thy all of strength the use wouldst thou If
sort such in thee love I ; so not do But
. report good thy is mine , mine being thou , As

been absence my hath winter a like How
! year fleeting the of pleasure the , thee From
! seen days dark what , felt I have freezings What
! where every bareness 's December old What
, time 's summer was removed time this yet And
, increase rich with big , autumn teeming The
, prime the of burden wanton the Bearing
: decease ' lords their after wombs 'd widow Like
me to 'd seem issue abundant this Yet
; fruit 'd unfather and orphans of hope But
, thee on wait pleasures his and summer For
; mute are birds very the , away thou , And
cheer a dull so with is 't , sing they if , Or
. near 's winter the dreading , pale look leaves That

, spring the in absent been I have you From
trim his all in 'd dress April proud-pied When
, thing every in youth of spirit a put Hath
. him with 'd leap and 'd laugh Saturn heavy That
smell sweet the nor birds of lays the nor Yet
hue in and odour in flowers different Of
, tell story 's summer any me make Could
; grew they where them pluck lap proud their from Or
, white 's lily the at wonder I did Nor
; rose the in vermilion deep the praise Nor
, delight of figures but , sweet but were They
. those all of pattern you , you after Drawn
, away you , and , still winter it 'd seem Yet
: play did these with I shadow your with As

: chide I did thus violet forward The
, smells that sweet thy steal thou didst whence , thief Sweet
pride purple The ? breath 's love my from not If
dwells complexion for cheek soft thy on Which
. dyed grossly too hast thou veins 's love my In
, hand thy for condemned I lily The
: hair thy n ' stol had marjoram of buds And
, stand did thorns on fearfully roses The
; despair white another , shame blushing One
both of n ' stol had , white nor red nor , third A
; breath thy 'd annex had robbery his to And
growth his all of pride in , theft his for , But
. death to up him eat canker vengeful A
s could none I yet , noted I flowers More

long so forget'st thou that , Muse , thou art Where
? might thy all thee gives which that of speak To
, song worthless some on fury thy thou Spend'st
? light subjects base lend to power thy Darkening
redeem straight and , Muse forgetful , Return
; spent idly so time numbers gentle In
esteem lays thy doth that ear the to Sing
. argument and skill both pen thy gives And
, survey face sweet 's love my , Muse resty , Rise
; there graven wrinkle any have Time If
, decay to satire a be , any If
. where every despised spoils 's Time make And
; life wastes Time than faster fame love my Give
. knife crooked and scythe his prevent'st thou So

amends thy be shall what , Muse truant O
? dyed beauty in truth of neglect thy For
; depends love my on beauty and truth Both
. dignified therein and , too thou dost So
say haply not thou wilt : Muse , answer Make
; 'd fix colour his with , colour no needs 'Truth
; lay to truth 's beauty , pencil no Beauty
' ? 'd intermix never if , best is best But
? dumb be thou wilt , praise no needs he Because
thee in lies for't ; so silence not Excuse
, tomb gilded a outlive much him make To
. be to yet ages of praised be to And
how thee teach I ; Muse , office thy do Then
. now shows he as hence long seem him make To

; seeming in weak more though , 'd strengthen is love My
: appear show the less though , less not love I
esteeming rich whose merchandized is love That
. where every publish doth tongue 's owner The
spring the in but then and new was love Our
, lays my with it greet to wont was I When
sing doth front 's summer in Philomel As
: days riper of growth in pipe her stops And
now pleasant less is summer the that Not
, night the hush did hymns mournful her when Than
bough every burthens music wild that But
. delight dear their lose common grown sweets And
, tongue my hold sometime I her like Therefore
. song my with you dull not would I Because

, forth brings Muse my poverty what , Alack
, pride her show to scope a such having That
worth more of is bare all argument The
! beside praise added my hath it when Than
! write can more no I if , not me blame , O
face a appears there and , glass your in Look
, quite invention blunt my over-goes That
. disgrace me doing and lines my Dulling
, mend to striving , then sinful not it Were
? well was before that subject the mar To
tend verses my pass other no to For
; tell to gifts your and graces your of Than
sit can verse my in than , more much , more And
. it in look you when you shows glass own Your

, old be can never you , friend fair , me To
, eyed I eye your first when were you as For
cold winters Three . still beauty your seems Such
, pride ' summers three shook forests the from Have
'd turn autumn yellow to springs beauteous Three
, seen I have seasons the of process In
, 'd burn Junes hot three in perfumes April Three
. green are yet which , fresh you saw I first Since
, dial-hand a like , beauty doth yet ! Ah
; perceived pace no and figure his from Steal
, stand doth still methinks which , hue sweet your So
: deceived be may eye mine and motion Hath
; unbred age thou , this hear , which of fear For
. dead summer 's beauty was born were you Ere

, idolatry 'd call be love my not Let
, show idol an as beloved my Nor
be praises and songs my alike all Since
. so ever and , such still , one of , one To
, kind to-morrow , to-day love my is Kind
; excellence wondrous a in constant Still
, confined constancy to verse my Therefore
. difference out leaves , expressing thing One
, argument my all is ' true and kind , 'Fair
; words other to varying ' true and , kind , 'Fair
, spent invention my is change this in And
. affords scope wondrous which , one in themes Three
, alone lived often have ' , true and , kind , 'Fair
. one in seat kept never now till three Which

time wasted of chronicle the in When
, wights fairest the of descriptions see I
rhyme old beautiful making beauty And
, knights lovely and dead ladies of praise In
, best 's beauty sweet of blazon the in , Then
, brow of , eye of , lip of , foot of , hand Of
'd express have would pen antique their see I
. now master you as beauty a such Even
prophecies but are praises their all So
; prefiguring you all , time our this Of
, eyes divining with but 'd look they for , And
: sing to worth your enough skill not had They
, days present these behold now which , we For
. praise to tongues lack but , wonder to eyes Had

soul prophetic the nor , fears own mine Not
, come to things on dreaming world wide the Of
, control love true my of lease the yet Can
. doom confined a to forfeit as Supposed
endured eclipse her hath moon mortal The
; presage own their mock augurs sad the And
assured themselves crown now Incertainties
. age endless of olives proclaims peace And
time balmy most this of drops the with Now
, subscribes me to death and , fresh looks love My
, rhyme poor this in live 'll I , him of spite , Since
: tribes speechless and dull o'er insults he While
, monument thy find shalt this in thou And
. spent are brass of tombs and crests ' tyrants When

character may ink that brain the in 's What
? spirit true my thee to figured not hath Which
, register to new what , speak to new 's What
? merit dear thy or love my express may That
, divine prayers like , yet but ; boy sweet , Nothing
, same very the o'er say day each , must I
, thine I , mine thou , old thing old no Counting
. name fair thy 'd hallow I first when as Even
case fresh 's love in love eternal that So
, age of injury and dust the not Weighs
, place wrinkles necessary to gives Nor
, page his aye for antiquity makes But
bred there love of conceit first the Finding
. dead it show would form outward and time Where

, heart of false was I that say never , O
. qualify to flame my 'd seem absence Though
depart myself from I might easy As
: lie doth breast thy in which , soul my from As
, ranged have I if : love of home my is That
, again return I travels that him Like
, exchanged time the with not , time the to Just
. stain my for water bring myself that So
'd reign nature my in though , believe Never
, blood of kinds all besiege that frailties All
, 'd stain be preposterously so could it That
; good of sum thy all nothing for leave To
, call I universe wide this nothing For
. all my art thou it in ; rose my , thou Save

there and here gone have I true is 't , Alas
, view the to motley a myself made And
, dear most is what cheap sold , thoughts own mine Gored
; new affections of offences old Made
truth on 'd look have I that is it true Most
, above all by , but : strangely and Askance
, youth another heart my gave blenches These
. love of best my thee proved essays worse And
: end no have shall what have , done is all Now
grind will more never I appetite Mine
, friend older an try to , proof newer On
. confined am I whom to , love in god A
, best the heaven my next , welcome me give Then
. breast loving most most and pure thy to Even

, chide Fortune with you do sake my for , O
, deeds harmful my of goddess guilty The
provide life my for better not did That
. breeds manners public which means public Than
, brand a receives name my that it comes Thence
subdued is nature my thence almost And
: hand 's dyer the like , in works it what To
; 'd renew were I wish and then me Pity
drink will I , patient willing a like , Whilst
infection strong my 'gainst eisel of Potions
, think bitter will I that bitterness No
. correction correct to , penance double Nor
ye assure I and , friend dear , then me Pity
. me cure to enough is pity your that Even

fill impression the doth pity and love Your
; brow my upon 'd stamp scandal vulgar Which
, ill or well me calls who I care what For
? allow good my , bad my o'er-green you So
strive must I and , world the all my are You
: tongue your from praises and shames my know To
, alive none to I nor , me to else None
. wrong or right changes or sense 'd steel my That
care all throw I abysm profound so In
sense 's adder my that , voices ' others Of
. are stopped flatterer to and critic To
: dispense do I neglect my with how Mark
bred purpose my in strongly so are You
. dead are methinks besides world the all That

; mind my in is eye mine , you left I Since
about go to me governs which that And
, blind partly is and function his part Doth
; out is effectually but , seeing Seems
heart the to delivers form no it For
: latch doth it which , shape or , flower of bird Of
, part no mind the hath objects quick his Of
: catch doth it what holds vision own his Nor
, sight gentlest or rudest the see it if For
, creature deformed'st or favour sweet most The
, night or day the , sea the or mountain The
: feature your to them shapes it , dove or crow The
, you with replete , more of Incapable
. untrue eye mine makes thus mind true most My

, you with 'd crown being , mind my doth whether Or
? flattery this , plague 's monarch the up Drink
, true saith eye mine , say I shall whether Or
, alchemy this it taught love your that And
indigest things and monsters of make To
, resemble self sweet your as cherubins Such
, best perfect a bad every Creating
? assemble beams his to objects as fast As
, seeing my in flattery is 't ; first the is 't , O
: up it drinks kingly most mind great my And
, 'greeing is gust his with what knows well eye Mine
: cup the prepare doth palate his to And
sin lesser the is 't , 'd poison be it If
. begin first doth and it loves eye mine That

, lie do writ have before I that lines Those
: dearer you love not could I said that those Even
why reason no knew judgment my then Yet
. clearer burn afterwards should flame full most My
accidents 'd million whose , time reckoning But
, kings of decrees change and vows 'twixt in Creep
, intents sharp'st the blunt , beauty sacred Tan
; things altering of course the to minds strong Divert
, tyranny 's time of fearing , why , Alas
' , best you love I 'Now say then not I Might
, incertainty o'er certain was I When
? rest the of doubting , present the Crowning
, so say not I might then ; babe a is Love
? grow doth still which that to growth full give To

minds true of marriage the to not me Let
love not is Love . impediments Admit
, finds alteration it when alters Which
: remove to remover the with bends Or
mark ever-fixed an is it ! no O
; shaken never is and tempests on looks That
, bark wandering every to star the is It
. taken be height his although , unknown 's worth Whose
cheeks and lips rosy though , fool 's Time not 's Love
: come compass 's sickle bending his Within
, weeks and hours brief his with not alters Love
. doom of edge the to even out it bears But
, proved me upon and error be this If
. loved ever man no nor , writ never I

all scanted have I that : thus me Accuse
, repay deserts great your should I Wherein
, call to love dearest your upon Forgot
; day by day me tie do bonds all Whereto
minds unknown with been frequent have I That
right dear-purchased own your time to given And
winds the all to sail hoisted have I That
. sight your from farthest me transport should Which
down errors and wilfulness my both Book
; accumulate surmise proof just on And
, frown your of level the within me Bring
; hate 'd waken your in me at not shoot But
prove to strive did I says appeal my Since
. love your of virtue and constancy The

, keen more appetites our make to , as Like
, urge palate our we compounds eager With
, unseen maladies our prevent to , As
, purge we when sickness shun to sicken We
, sweetness ne'er-cloying your of tuff being , so Even
feeding my frame I did sauces bitter To
meetness of kind a found , welfare of sick , And
. needing true was there that ere diseased be To
anticipate to , love in policy Thus
assured faults to grew , not were that ills The
state healthful a medicine to brought And
: cured be ill by would , goodness of rank , Which
, true lesson the find and , learn I thence But
. you of sick fell so that him poison Drugs

, tears Siren of drunk I have potions What
, within hell as foul limbecks from 'd Distill
, fears to hopes and hopes to fears Applying
! win to myself saw I when losing Still
, committed heart my hath errors wretched What
! never blessed so itself thought hath it Whilst
fitted been spheres their of out eyes mine have How
! fever madding this of distraction the In
true find I now ! ill of benefit O
; better made still evil by is better That
, anew built is it when , love 'd ruin And
. greater far , strong more , first at than fairer Grows
content my to rebuked return I So
. spent have I than more thrice ill by gain And

, now me befriends unkind once were you That
feel did then I which sorrow that for And
, bow transgression my under I must Needs
. steel 'd hammer or brass were nerves my Unless
shaken unkindness my by were you if For
, time of hell a 'd pass 've you , yours by I As
taken leisure no have , tyrant a , I And
. crime your in suffered I once how weigh To
'd remember have might woe of night our that , O
, hits sorrow true hard how , sense deepest My
'd tender then , me to you as , you to soon And
! fits bosoms wounded which slave humble The
; fee a becomes now trespass your that But
. me ransom must yours and , yours ransoms Mine

, 'd esteem vile than vile be to better is 'T
, being of reproach receives be to not When
'd deem so is which lost pleasure just the And
: seeing ' others by but feeling our by Not
eyes adulterate false others should why For
? blood sportive my to salutation Give
, spies frailer are why frailties my on Or
? good think I what bad count wills their in Which
level that they and , am I that am I , No
: own their up reckon abuses my At
; bevel be themselves they though , straight be may I
; shown be not must deeds my thoughts rank their By
, maintain they evil general this Unless
. reign badness their in and , bad are men All

brain my within are , tables thy , gift Thy
, memory lasting with 'd character Full
remain rank idle that above shall Which
; eternity to even , date all Beyond
heart and brain as long so , least the at Or
; subsist to nature by faculty Have
part his yield oblivion razed to each Till
. 'd miss be can never record thy , thee Of
, hold much so not could retention poor That
; score to love dear thy tallies I need Nor
, bold I was me from them give to Therefore
: more thee receive that tables those trust To
thee remember to adjunct an keep To
. me in forgetfulness import to Were

: change do I that boast not shalt thou , Time , No
might newer with up built pyramids Thy
; strange nothing , novel nothing are me To
. sight former a of dressings but are They
admire we therefore and , brief are dates Our
, old is that us upon foist dost thou What
desire our to born them make rather And
. told them heard have before we that think Than
, defy both I thee and registers Thy
, past the nor present the at wondering Not
, lie doth see we what and records thy For
. haste continual thy by less or more Made
; be ever shall this and vow do I This
. thee and scythe thy despite , true be will I

, state of child the but were love dear my If
' unfather'd be bastard 's Fortune for might It
, hate 's Time to or love 's Time to subject As
. 'd gather flowers with flowers or , weeds among Weeds
; accident from far builded was it , No
falls nor , pomp smiling in not suffers It
, discontent thralled of blow the Under
: calls fashion our time inviting the Whereto
, heretic that , policy not fears It
, hours 'd short-number of leases on works Which
, politic hugely stands alone all But
. showers with drowns nor heat with grows nor it That
, time of fools the call witness I this To
. crime for lived have who , goodness for die Which

, canopy the bore I me to aught 't Were
, honouring outward the extern my With
, eternity for bases great laid Or
? ruining or waste than short more prove Which
favour and form on dwellers seen not I Have
, rent much too paying by , more and , all Lose
, savour simple forgoing sweet compound For
? spent gazing their in , thrivers Pitiful
, heart thy in obsequious be me let , No
, free but poor , oblation my thou take And
, art no knows , seconds with 'd mix not is Which
. thee for me only , render mutual But
soul true a ! informer 'd suborn thou , Hence
. control thy in least stands 'd impeach most When

power thy in who , boy lovely my , thou O
; hour , sickle his , glass fickle 's Time hold Dost
show'st therein and , grown waning by hast Who
; grow'st self sweet thy as withering lovers Thy
, wrack over mistress sovereign , Nature If
, back thee pluck will still , onwards goest thou As
skill her that , purpose this to thee keeps She
. kill minutes wretched and disgrace time May
! pleasure her of minion thou O , her fear Yet
: treasure her , keep still not but , detain may She
, be must 'd answer , 'd delay though , audit Her
. thee render to is quietus her And
) (
) (

, fair counted not was black age old the In
; name 's beauty not bore it , were it if Or
, heir successive 's beauty black is now But
: shame bastard a with 'd slander beauty And
, power 's nature on put hath hand each since For
, face 'd borrow false 's art with foul the Fairing
, bower holy no , name no hath beauty Sweet
. disgrace in lives not if , profaned is But
, black raven are brows ' mistress my Therefore
seem mourners they and , suited so eyes Her
, lack beauty no , fair born not , who such At
: esteem false a with creation Slandering
, woe their of becoming , mourn they so Yet
. so look should beauty says tongue every That

, play'st music , music my , thou when , oft How
sounds motion whose wood blessed that Upon
sway'st gently thou when , fingers sweet thy With
, confounds ear mine that concord wiry The
leap nimble that jacks those envy I Do
, hand thy of inward tender the kiss To
, reap harvest that should which , lips poor my Whilst
! stand blushing thee by boldness 's wood the At
state their change would they , tickled so be To
, chips dancing those with situation And
, gait gentle with walk fingers thy whom O'er
. lips living than blest more wood dead Making
, this in are happy so jacks saucy Since
. kiss to lips thy me , fingers thy them Give

shame of waste a in spirit of expense The
lust , action till and ; action in lust Is
, blame of full , bloody , murderous , perjured Is
, trust to not , cruel , rude , extreme , Savage
, straight despised but sooner no 'd Enjoy
had sooner no and , hunted reason Past
bait 'd swallow a as , hated reason Past
; mad taker the make to laid purpose On
; so possession in and pursuit in Mad
; extreme , have to quest in and , having , Had
; woe very a , proved and , proof in bliss A
. dream a , behind ; proposed joy a , Before
well knows none yet ; knows well world the this All
. hell this to men leads that heaven the shun To

; sun the like nothing are eyes ' mistress My
; red ' lips her than red more far is Coral
; dun are breasts her then why , white be snow If
. head her on grow wires black , wires be hairs If
, white and red , 'd damask roses seen have I
; cheeks her in I see roses such no But
delight more there is perfumes some in And
. reeks mistress my from that breath the in Than
know I well yet , speak her hear to love I
; sound pleasing more far a hath music That
; go goddess a saw never I grant I
: ground the on treads , walks she when , mistress My
rare as love my think I , heaven by , yet And
. compare false with belied she any As

, art thou as so , tyrannous as art Thou
; cruel them make proudly beauties whose those As
heart doting dear my to know'st thou well For
. jewel precious most and fairest the art Thou
behold thee that say some , faith good in , Yet
: groan love make to power the not hath face Thy
, bold so be not dare I err they say To
. alone myself to it swear I Although
, swear I false not is that sure be to , And
, face thy on thinking but , groans thousand A
bear witness do , neck 's another on One
. place 's judgment my in fairest is black Thy
, deeds thy in save black thou art nothing In
. proceeds , think I as , slander this thence And

, me pitying as , they and , love I eyes Thine
, disdain with me torments heart thy Knowing
, be mourners loving and black on put Have
. pain my upon ruth pretty with Looking
heaven of sun morning the not truly And
, east the of cheeks grey the becomes Better
even the in ushers that star full that Nor
, west sober the to glory that half Doth
: face thy become eyes mourning two those As
heart thy beseem well as then it let , O
, grace thee doth mourning since , me for mourn To
. part every in like pity thy suit And
black is herself beauty swear I will Then
. lack complexion thy that foul they all And

groan to heart my makes that heart that Beshrew
! me and friend my gives it wound deep that For
, alone me torture to enough not Is't
? be must friend sweet'st my slavery to slave But
, taken hath eye cruel thy myself from Me
: 'd engross hast harder thou self next my And
; forsaken am I , thee and , myself , him Of
. 'd cross be to thus threefold thrice torment A
, ward 's bosom steel thy in heart my Prison
; bail heart poor my let heart 's friend my then But
; guard his be heart my let , me keeps Whoe'er
: gaol my in rigor use then not canst Thou
, thee in pent being , I for ; wilt thou yet And
. me in is that all and , thine am Perforce

, thine is he that 'd confess have I now , So
, will thy to mortgaged am myself I And
mine other that so , forfeit 'll I Myself
: still comfort my be to , restore wilt Thou
, free be not will he nor , not wilt thou But
; kind is he and covetous art thou For
me for write to surety-like but 'd learn He
. bind doth fast as him that bond that Under
, take wilt thou beauty thy of statute The
, use to all forth put'st that , usurer Thou
; sake my for debtor came friend a sue And
. abuse unkind my through lose I him So
: me and him both hast thou ; lost I have Him
. free not I am yet and , whole the pays He

' , 'Will thy hast thou , wish her hath Whoever
; overplus in ' 'Will and , boot to ' 'Will And
, still thee vex that I am enough than More
. thus addition making will sweet thy To
, spacious and large is will whose , thou Wilt
? thine in will my hide to vouchsafe once Not
, gracious right seem others in will Shall
? shine acceptance fair no will my in And
still rain receives yet , water all sea The
; store his to addeth abundance in And
' 'Will thy to add ' , 'Will in rich being , thou So
. more ' 'Will large thy make to , mine of will One
; kill beseechers fair no , unkind no Let
' . 'Will one that in me and , one but all Think

, near so come I that thee cheque soul thy If
' , 'Will thy was I that soul blind thy to Swear
; there admitted is , knows soul thy , will And
. fulfil , sweet , love-suit my love for far Thus
, love thy of treasure the fulfil will ' 'Will
. one will my and , wills with full it fill , Ay
prove we ease with receipt great of things In
: none 'd reckon is one number a Among
, untold pass me let number the in Then
; be must one I account ' stores thy in Though
hold thee please it so , me hold nothing For
: thee to sweet something a , me nothing That
, still that love and , love thy name my but Make
' . 'Will is name my for , me lovest thou then And

, eyes mine to thou dost what , Love , fool blind Thou
? see they what not see and , behold they That
, lies it where see , is beauty what know They
. be to worst the take is best the what Yet
looks over-partial by corrupt eyes If
, ride men all where bay the in 'd anchor Be
, hooks forged thou hast falsehood ' eyes of Why
? tied is heart my of judgment the Whereto
plot several a that think heart my should Why
? place common 's world wide the knows heart my Which
, not is this say , this seeing eyes mine Or
? face a foul so upon truth fair put To
, erred have eyes and heart my true right things In
. 'd transferr now they are plague false this to And

truth of made is she that swears love my When
, lies she know I though , her believe do I
, youth 'd untutor some me think might she That
. subtleties false 's world the in Unlearned
, young me thinks she that thinking vainly Thus
, best the past are days my knows she Although
: tongue speaking false her credit I Simply
. 'd suppress truth simple is thus sides both On
? unjust is she not she says wherefore But
? old am I that I not say wherefore And
, trust seeming in is habit best 's love , O
: told years have to not loves love in age And
, me with she and her with lie I Therefore
. be 'd flatter we lies by faults our in And

wrong the justify to me not call , O
; heart my upon lays unkindness thy That
; tongue thy with but eye thine with not me Wound
. art by not me slay and power with power Use
, sight my in but , elsewhere lovest thou me Tell
: aside eye thine glance to forbear , heart Dear
might thy when cunning with wound thou need'st What
? bide can defense 'd o'er-press my than more Is
knows well love my ! ah : thee excuse me Let
, enemies mine been have looks pretty Her
, foes my turns she face my from therefore And
: injuries their dart might elsewhere they That
, slain near am I since but ; so not do Yet
. pain my rid and looks with outright me Kill

press not do ; cruel art thou as wise Be
; disdain much too with patience tongue-tied My
express words and words me lend sorrow Lest
. pain pity-wanting my of manner The
, were it better , wit thee teach might I If
; so me tell to , love , yet , love to not Though
, near be deaths their when , men sick testy As
; know physicians their from health but news No
, mad grow should I , despair should I if For
: thee of ill speak might madness my in And
, bad so grown is world ill-wresting this Now
, be believed ears mad by slanderers Mad
, belied thou nor , so be not may I That
. wide go heart proud thy though , straight eyes thine Bear

, eyes mine with thee love not do I , faith In
; note errors thousand a thee in they For
, despise they what loves that heart my is 't But
; dote to pleased is view of despite in Who
, delighted tune 's tongue thy with ears mine are Nor
, prone touches base to , feeling tender Nor
invited be to desire , smell nor , taste Nor
: alone thee with feast sensual any To
can senses five my nor wits five my But
, thee serving from heart foolish one Dissuade
, man a of likeness the 'd unsway leaves Who
: be to wretch vassal and slave hearts proud Thy
, gain my count I far thus plague my Only
. pain me awards sin me makes that she That

, hate virtue dear thy and sin my is Love
: loving sinful on grounded , sin my of Hate
, state own thine thou compare mine with but , O
; reproving not merits it find shalt thou And
, thine of lips those from not , do it if , Or
ornaments scarlet their profaned have That
, mine as oft as love of bonds false 'd seal And
. rents their of revenues ' beds ' others 'd Robb
those lovest thou as , thee love I lawful it Be
: thee importune mine as woo eyes thine Whom
grows it when that , heart thy in pity Root
. be pitied to deserve may pity Thy
, hide dost thou what have to seek dost thou If
! denied be thou mayst self-example By

catch to runs housewife careful a as ! Lo
, away broke creatures 'd feather her of One
dispatch swift an makes and babe her down Sets
, stay have would she thing the of pursuit In
, chase in her holds child neglected her Whilst
bent is care busy whose her catch to Cries
, face her before flies which that follow To
; discontent 's infant poor her prizing Not
, thee from flies which that after thou runn'st So
; behind afar thee chase babe thy I Whilst
, me to back turn , hope thy catch thou if But
: kind be , me kiss , part 's mother the play And
' , 'Will thy have mayst thou that pray I will So
. still crying loud my and , back turn thou If

, despair and comfort of have I loves Two
: still me suggest do spirits two like Which
, fair right man a is angel better The
. ill 'd colour woman a spirit worser The
evil female my , hell to soon me win To
, side my from angel better my Tempteth
, devil a be to saint my corrupt would And
. pride foul her with purity his Wooing
fiend 'd turn be angel my that whether And
; tell directly not but , may I Suspect
, friend each to both , me from both being But
: hell 's another in angel one guess I
, doubt in live but , know ne'er I shall this Yet
. out one good my fire angel bad my Till

make did hand own 's Love that lips Those
' hate I ' said that sound the forth Breathed
; sake her for 'd languish that me To
, state woeful my saw she when But
, come mercy did heart her in Straight
sweet ever that tongue that Chiding
, doom gentle giving in used Was
: greet to anew thus it taught And
, end an with 'd alter she ' hate I '
day gentle as it 'd follow That
fiend a like who , night follow Doth
; away flown is hell to heaven From
, threw she away hate from ' hate I '
' . you 'not saying , life my saved And

, earth sinful my of centre the , soul Poor
; array thee that powers rebel these ] [
, dearth suffer and within pine thou dost Why
? gay costly so walls outward thy Painting
, lease a short so having , cost large so Why
? spend mansion fading thy upon thou Dost
, excess this of inheritors , worms Shall
? end 's body thy this is ? charge thy up Eat
, loss 's servant thy upon thou live , soul Then
; store thy aggravate to pine that let And
; dross of hours selling in divine terms Buy
: more no rich be without , fed be Within
, men on feeds that , Death on feed thou shalt So
. then dying more no 's there , dead once Death And

still longing , fever a as is love My
, disease the nurseth longer which that For
, ill the preserve doth which that on Feeding
. please to appetite sickly uncertain The
, love my to physician the , reason My
, kept not are prescriptions his that Angry
approve now desperate I and , me left Hath
. except did physic which , death is Desire
, care past is reason now , am I cure Past
; unrest evermore with frantic-mad And
, are 's madmen as discourse my and thoughts My
; 'd express vainly truth the from random At
, bright thee thought and fair thee sworn have I For
. night as dark as , hell as black as art Who

, head my in put Love hath eyes what , me O
! sight true with correspondence no have Which
, fled judgment my is where , have they if , Or
? aright see they what falsely censures That
, dote eyes false my whereon fair be that If
? so not is it say to world the means What
denote well doth love then , not be it If
' . 'No 's men all as true so not is eye 's Love
, true be eye 's Love can how , O ? it can How
? tears with and watching with 'd vex so is That
; view my mistake I though , then marvel No
. clears heaven till not sees itself sun The
, blind me keep'st thou tears with ! Love cunning O
. find should faults foul thy well-seeing eyes Lest

, not thee love I say ! cruel O , thou Canst
? partake thee with myself against I When
forgot I when , thee on think not I Do
? sake thy for , tyrant all , myself of Am
? friend my call do I that thee hateth Who
? upon fawn do I that thou frown'st whom On
spend not I do , me on lour'st thou if , Nay
? moan present with myself upon Revenge
, respect myself in I do merit What
, despise to service thy proud so is That
, defect thy worship doth best my all When
? eyes thine of motion the by Commanded
; mind thy know I now for , on hate , love , But
. blind am I and , lovest thou see can that Those

might powerful this thou hast power what from , O
? sway to heart my insufficiency With
, sight true my to lie the give me make To
? day the grace not doth brightness that swear And
, ill things of becoming this thou hast Whence
deeds thy of refuse very the in That
skill of warrantize and strength such is There
? exceeds best all worst thy , mind my in , That
more thee love me make to how thee taught Who
? hate of cause just see and hear I more The
, abhor do others what love I though , O
: state my abhor not shouldst thou others With
, me in love raised unworthiness thy If
. thee of beloved be to I worthy More

; is conscience what know to young too is Love
? love of born is conscience not knows who Yet
, amiss my not urge , cheater gentle , Then
: prove self sweet thy faults my of guilty Lest
betray do I , me betraying thou , For
; treason 's body gross my to part nobler My
may he that body my tell doth soul My
; reason father no stays flesh ; love in Triumph
thee out point doth , name thy at rising , But
, pride this of Proud . prize triumphant his As
, be to drudge poor thy contented is He
. side thy by fall , affairs thy in stand To
call I that it hold conscience of want No
. fall and rise I love dear whose for ' 'love Her

, forsworn am I know'st thou thee loving In
, swearing love me to , forsworn twice art thou But
, torn faith new and broke bed-vow thy act In
. bearing love new after hate new vowing In
, thee accuse I do breach ' oaths two of why But
; most perjured am I ? twenty break I When
thee misuse to but oaths are vows my all For
, lost is thee in faith honest my all And
, kindness deep thy of oaths deep sworn have I For
, constancy thy , truth thy , love thy of Oaths
, blindness to eyes gave , thee enlighten to , And
; see they thing the against swear them made Or
, I perjured more ; fair thee sworn have I For
! lie a foul so truth the against swear To

: asleep fell and , brand his by laid Cupid
, found advantage this 's Dian of maid A
steep quickly did fire love-kindling his And
; ground that of valley-fountain cold a In
Love of fire holy this from 'd borrow Which
, endure to still , heat lively dateless A
prove men yet which , bath seething a grew And
. cure sovereign a maladies strange Against
, new-fired brand 's Love eye ' mistress my at But
; breast my touch would needs trial for boy The
, desired bath of help the , withal sick , I
, guest 'd distemper sad a , hied thither And
lies help my for bath the : cure no found But
. eyes ' mistress my -- fire new got Cupid Where

asleep once lying Love-god little The
, brand heart-inflaming his side his by Laid
keep to life chaste 'd vow that nymphs many Whilst
hand maiden her in but ; by tripping Came
fire that up took votary fairest The
; 'd warm had hearts true of legions many Which
desire hot of general the so And
. 'd disarm hand virgin a by sleeping Was
, by well cool a in quenched she brand This
, perpetual heat took fire 's Love from Which
remedy healthful and bath a Growing
, thrall ' mistress my , I but ; diseased men For
, prove I that by this and , cure for there Came
. love not cools water , water heats fire 's Love

