https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dear_brother.php

[C] Dear Brother, Mama left us this morning
Death's [G7] angels took her a-[C] way
She's gone to meet Daddy up there in heaven
But [G7] we'll meet again some [C] day. [C7]

She [F] left this world with a [C] smile on her face
Whisp'ring the Saviour's [G7] name
[C] Dear Brother, Mama left us this morning
For the [G7] city where is no [C] pain.

As I stood by her bedside, those last few moments
I lived my childhood again
I thought of you Brother and of the old homestead
And my tears they fell like rain.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dear_christian_people_all_rejoice.php

Dear Christian people all, rejoice,
Each soul with joy upraising.
Pour forth a song with heart and voice,
With love and gladness singing.
Give thanks to God, our Lord above,
Thanks for His miracle of love!
Dearly He hath redeemed us.

He spoke to His belovèd Son
With infinite compassion:
“Go hence, my heart’s most precious One,
Be to the lost Salvation;
Death, his relentless tyrant, stay,
And bear him from his sins away
With Thee to live forever!"

The Son came, saying: “Cling to Me,
Thy sorrows now are ending;
Freely I give Myself to thee,
Thy life with Mine defending;
For I am thine and thou art Mine,
And where I am there thou shalt shine,
The foe shall never reach us."

“To heaven again I rise from hence,
High to my Father soaring,
The Master there to be, and thence
My Spirit on thee pouring;
In every grief to comfort thee,
And teach thee more and more of Me,
Into all truth still guiding."

“What I have done and taught on earth,
Do Thou, and teach, none dreading;
That so God’s kingdom may go forth,
And His high praise be spreading;
And guard thee from the words of men,
Lest the great joy be lost again:
This my last charge I leave thee."



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dear_christians.php

1. Dear Christians, one and all, rejoice,
With exultation springing,
And, with united heart and voice
And holy rapture singing,
Proclaim the wonders God hath done,
How His right arm the victory won;
Right dearly it hath cost Him. 

2. Fast bound in Satan's chains I lay,
Death brooded darkly o'er me,
Sin was my torment night and day,
In sin my mother bore me;
Yea, deep and deeper still I fell,
Life had become a living hell,
So firmly sin possessed me. 

3. My own good works availed me naught,
No merit they attaining;
Free will against God's judgment fought,
Dead to all good remaining.
My fears increased till sheer despair
Left naught but death to be my share;
The pangs of hell I suffered. 

4. But God beheld my wretched state
Before the world's foundation,
And, mindful of His mercies great,
He planned my soul's salvation.
A father's heart He turned to me,
Sought my redemption fervently:
He gave His dearest Treasure. 

5. He spoke to His beloved Son:
'Tis time to have compassion.
Then go, bright Jewel of My crown,
And bring to man salvation;
From sin and sorrow set him free,
Slay bitter death for him that he
May live with Thee forever.

6. This Son obeyed His Father's will,
Was born of virgin mother,
And God's good pleasure to fulfill,
He came to be my Brother.
No garb of pomp or power He wore,
A servant's form, like mine, He bore,
To lead the devil captive. 

7.To me He spake: Hold fast to Me,
I am thy Rock and Castle;
Thy Ransom I Myself will be,
For thee I strive and wrestle;
For I am with thee, I am thine,
And evermore thou shalt be Mine;
The Foe shall not divide us. 

8. The Foe shall shed My precious blood,
Me of My life bereaving.
All this I suffer for thy good;
Be steadfast and believing.
Life shall from death the victory win,
My innocence shall bear thy sin;
So art thou blest forever. 

9. Now to My Father I depart,
The Holy Spirit sending
And, heavenly wisdom to impart,
My help to thee extending.
He shall in trouble comfort thee,
Teach thee to know and follow Me,
And in all truth shall guide thee. 

10. What I have done and taught, teach thou,
My ways forsake thou never;
So shall My kingdom flourish now
And God be praised forever.
Take heed lest men with base alloy
The heavenly treasure should destroy;
This counsel I bequeath thee. 



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dear_father_whom_we_cannot_see.php

Dear Father, Whom we cannot see,
We know that Thou art near;
With longing hearts we turn to Thee,
And ask that Thou wilt set us free
From war and hate and fear.

Dear Father, King of love and peace,
We know that Thou art strong;
Make conflicts everywhere to cease,
Let mercy everywhere increase,
And kindness conquer wrong.

Dear Father, Lord of sea and land,
We know that Thou art wise;
O make the nations understand
That only by Thy guiding hand
Can lasting peace arise.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dear_god_our_father_at_thy_knees.php

Dear God, our Father, at Thy knees confessing
Our sins and follies, close in Thine embrace,
Children forgiven, happy in Thy blessing,
Deepen our spirits to receive Thy grace.

Not for more beauty would our eyes entreat Thee,
Flooded with beauty, beauty everywhere;
Only for keener vision that may greet Thee,
In all Thy vestures of the earth and air.

The stars and rainbows are Thy wondrous wearing,
Sunlight and shadow moving on the hills;
Holy the meadow where Thy feet are faring,
Holy the brooklet that Thy laughter fills.

Not for more love our craving hearts implore Thee,
But for more power to love until they glow
Like hearths of comfort, eager to restore Thee,
Hidden in human wretchedness and woe.

In souls most sullen Thou art softly dreaming
Of saints and heroes wrought from Thy divine
Pity and patience, still the lost redeeming,
Deepen our spirits for love like Thine.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dear_is_the_spot_where_christians_sleep.php

1. Dear Is the Spot Where Christians Sleep
And sweet the strains their spirits pour;
O, why should we in anguish weep?
They are not lost, but gone before.

2. Secure from every mortal care,
By sin and sorrow vexed no more,
Eternal happiness they share,
Who are not lost, but gone before.

3. To Zion's peaceful courts above,
In faith triumphant may we soar,
Embracing in the arms of love
The friends not lost, but gone before.

4. To Jordan's bank, whene'er we come,
And hear the swelling waters roar,
Jesus, convey us safely home, 
To friends not lost, but gone before.





https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dear_jesus_canst_thou_help_me.php

Dear Jesus, canst Thou help me?
My soul is full of woe;
My heart is almost breaking,
I’ve nowhere else to go.
Refrain

I’ve nowhere else to go,
Dear Jesus, but to Thee,
And so I lift my voice and cry,
Have mercy, Lord on me.
Have mercy, Lord, on me.
Have mercy, Lord on me
And so I lift my voice and cry,
Have mercy, Lord on me.

I feel I am a sinner,
And this my only plea,
The sweet and blessèd assurance,
That Thou hast died for me.

Refrain

I’ve heard there is a fountain,
Where cleansing waters flow;
My sins though red like crimson,
May now be white as snow.

Refrain

Thy blood doth fill that fountain,
Thy blood so pure and free;
That blood availed for others,
And now avails for me.

Refrain

Dear Jesus, loving Savior;
Thou precious dying Lamb,
Where here my faith is pleading;
Now take me as I am.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dear_little_one.php

1. Dear little One! how sweet Thou art,
Thine eyes so bright they shine,
So bright they almost seem to speak
When Mary's looks meet thing.
How faint and feeble is thy cry,
Like plaint of harmless dove,
When Thou dost murmur in thy sleep
Of sorrow and of love.

2. When Mary bids Thee sleep Thou sleep'st,
Thou wakest when she calls;
Thou art content upon her lap,
Or in the rugged stalls.
Simplest of Babes! with what a grace,
Thou dost Thy mother's will,
Thine infant fashions all betray
The God-head's hidden skill.

3. When Joseph takes Thee in his arms,
And smooths Thy little cheek,
Thou lookest up into his face
So helpless and so meek.
Yes! Thou art what Thou seem'st to be,
A thing of smiles and tears;
Yet Thou art God, and heav'n and earth,
Adore Thee with their fears.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dear_little_stranger.php

Low in a manger, dear little Stranger,
Jesus, the wonderful Savior, was born.
There was none to receive Him, none to believe Him,
None but the angels were watching that morn.
Refrain

Dear little Stranger, slept in a manger,
No downy pillow under His head;
But with the poor He slumbered secure,
The dear little Babe in His bed.

Angels descending, over Him bending,
Chanted a tender and silent refrain;
Then a wonderful story told of His glory,
Unto the shepherds on Bethlehem’s plain.

Refrain

Dear little Stranger, born in a manger,
Maker and Monarch, and Savior of all;
I will love You forever! Grieve You? No, never!
You did for me make Your bed in a stall.

Refrain



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dear_lord_and_father_of_mankind.php

Dear Lord and Father of mankind,
Forgive our foolish ways;
Reclothe us in our rightful mind,
In purer lives Thy service find,
In deeper reverence, praise.

In simple trust like theirs who heard,
Beside the Syrian sea,
The gracious calling of the Lord,
Let us, like them, without a word,
Rise up and follow Thee.

O Sabbath rest by Galilee,
O calm of hills above,
Where Jesus knelt to share with Thee
The silence of eternity,
Interpreted by love!

With that deep hush subduing all
Our words and works that drown
The tender whisper of Thy call,
As noiseless let Thy blessing fall
As fell Thy manna down.

Drop Thy still dews of quietness,
Till all our strivings cease;
Take from our souls the strain and stress,
And let our ordered lives confess
The beauty of Thy peace.

Breathe through the heats of our desire
Thy coolness and Thy balm;
Let sense be dumb, let flesh retire;
Speak through the earthquake, wind, and fire,
O still, small voice of calm.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dear_lord_and_master_mine.php

Dear Lord and Master mine,
Thy happy servant see;
My Conqueror, with what joy divine
Thy captive clings to Thee!

I love Thy yoke to wear,
To feel Thy gracious bands;
Sweetly restrained by Thy care
And happy in Thy hands.

No bar would I remove,
No bond would I unbind;
Within the limits of Thy love
Full liberty I find.

I would not walk alone,
But still with Thee, my God;
At every step my blindness own,
And ask of Thee the road.

Dear Lord and Master mine,
Still keep Thy servant true;
My Guardian and my Guide divine
Bring, bring Thy pilgrim through.

My Conqueror and my King,
Still keep me in Thy train;
And with Thee Thy glad captive bring
When Thou return’st to reign.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dear_lord_we_long_to_see_your_face.php

Dear Lord, we long to see your face,
to know you risen from the grave,
but we have missed the joy and grace
of seeing you, as others have;
yet in your company we'll wait,
and we shall see you, soon or late.

Dear Friend, we do not know the way,
nor clearly see the path ahead;
so often, therefore, we delay
and doubt your power to raise the dead;
yet we with you will firmly stay--
you are the truth, the life, the way.

We find it hard, Lord, to believe.
Long habit makes us want to prove:
to see, to touch, and thus perceive
the truth and person whom we love;
yet when in fellowship we meet,
you come yourself, each one to greet.

You come to us, our God, our Lord.
You do not show your hands and side,
but give, instead, your best reward
as in your promise we abide.
By faith we know and grow and wait
to see and praise you, soon or late.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dear_lord_who_dwellest_with_us_now.php

Dear Lord, who dwellest with us now
In sad humanity,
Give us beneath the cross to bow
Which men have laid on Thee.

When hunger calls to us for bread
With childhood’s piteous plea,
Make us to know what Thou hast said
Of those who give to Thee.

When stranger knocketh at our door
For cheer and sympathy,
Our hearts would warmest greetings pour,
That we may welcome Thee.

When sick and sore distressed appeal
In man’s infirmity,
We’d haste the broken heart to heal
That we may comfort Thee.

When captive lives in mortal pains
Are clamoring to be free,
We’d strike away the heavy chains
That we may succor Thee.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dear_lord_on_this_thy_servants_day.php

Dear Lord, on this Thy servant’s day,
Who left for Thee the gold and mart,
Who heard Thee whisper, “Come away,"
And followed with a single heart,

Give us, amid earth’s weary moil,
And wealth for which men cark and care,
’Mid fortune’s pride, and need’s wild toil,
And broken hearts in purple rare,

Give us Thy grace to rise above
The glare of this world’s smelting fires;
Let God’s great love put out the love
Of gold, and gain, and low desires.

Still, like a breath from scented lime
Borne into rooms where sick men faint,
His voice comes floating through all time,
Thine own evangelist and saint.

Still sweetly rings the Gospel strain
Of golden store that knows not rust:
The love of Christ is more than gain,
And heavenly crowns than yellow dust.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dear_master_in_thy_way.php

Dear Master, in Thy way
Our willing feet shall tread;
What joy Thy mandate to obey,
Our great and glorious Head.

The closing waters hid
Our former world, and we,
Seeking through death our Savior’s side,
Rejoice to die with Thee.

And as we rise again,
Be this confession giv’n,
That we have ris’n with Christ to reign
The Lord of earth and Heav’n.

So would we die to live,
And live no more to die;
Our risen lives, O Christ, receive
And seal them in the sky.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dear_redeemer_keep_me_free.php

1. Dear Redeemer, Keep Me Free
Precious Jesus, Jesus, free in thee,
From all evil every hour,
By thy Spirit's, Spirit's healing power.

Chorus:

Savior, hear, draw me near,
Keep me in thy tender care,
Safe from every chilling blast,
Then I'll rest in, rest in thee at last.

2. O, the comfort and the joy,
Of thy presence, presence, nor alloy!
Then to thee how sweet to sing!
Dearly blessed, blessed Lord and King.

3. Yea, with contrite heart each day
Sing thy praise in, praise in richest lay;
And when life on earth is done,
May I dwell with, dwell with thee at home,

4. There to join th'angelic throng,
And the blood-washed, blood-washed saints in song,
And in richest diadem,
Singing, "Glory, glory, and Amen;

5. "Glory to the great I AM,
Highest honor, honor to the Lamb;
Halleluia and amen,
Praises, glory, glory, yea, amen."

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dear_sabbath_home.php



Hark, hark the song, gliding along,
Borne on the summer breeze, far, far away;
Dear Sabbath home, once more we come,
Hailing with glad delight this happy day;
Eyes beaming brightly, hearts bounding lightly,
Now we sing our merry, merry lay.
Refrain

Dear Sabbath home, once more we come,
Hailing with glad delight this happy day.

Green shady bowers, sweet blushing flowers,
Come with the summer time, blooming anew;
Morn’s gentle ray, golden and gay,
Shines on the lily-bells sparkling with dew;
Beauty is calling, music is falling,
Now again earth wakes her joyful lay.

Refrain

Hark, hark the song, floating along,
Borne to the sunny land fadeless and fair;
Savior and King, gladly we bring
Praise for Thy precious love, Thy tender care;
Gathered before Thee, young hearts adore Thee,
Savior, hear, O hear our happy lay.

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dear_savior_from_thy_throne_above.php

Dear Savior, from Thy throne above,
Where countless children bow,
Oh, let Thy loving eye behold
And bless us children now.
Refrain

Our hearts in tuneful numbers wake,
Our tongues with rapture sing,
All glory, honor, praise to Thee,
Redeemer, Lord and King!

Thy mercy led us thro’ the year
That sweetly passed away,
And thro’ Thy grace we gather now
To hail our festive day.

Refrain

Oh, may we learn in early youth
Thy holy Word to prize,
The lamp that guides our feet to Heav’n,
Our home beyond the skies.

Refrain

Oh, happy thought, if, faithful here,
We work and watch and pray,
We’ll spend with Thee in Heav’n at last
An endless happy day.

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dear_savior_if_these_lambs_should_stray.php

Dear Savior, if these lambs should stray,
From Thy secure enclosure’s bound,
And, lured by worldly joys away,
Among the thoughtless crowd be found,

Remember still that they are Thine,
That Thy dear sacred Name they bear,
Think that the seal of love divine
The sign of covenant grace they wear.

In all their erring, sinful years,
Oh, let them ne’er forgotten be;
Remember all the prayers and tears
Which made them consecrate to Thee.

And when these lips no more can pray,
These eyes can weep for them no more,
Turn Thou their feet from folly’s way,
The wanderers to Thy fold restore.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dear_savior_stretch_thy_loving_arms.php

Dear Savior, stretch Thy loving arms
Above the stormy sea,
Where, tossed ’mid dark and angry waves,
The mariner calls to Thee.
Upon that fierce and angry main
My poor weak bark doth ride,
O what am I ’mid such strong foes
Without Thee by my side?

O as Thou didst on Galilee
The waters calm at will,
When torrents raised by evil breath
The sinking ship did fill:
So now in my storm shaken soul
Awake with strength divine,
And whisper ‘peace’ to warring winds,
And let Thy glory shine.

Be Thou my Pilot through the mists
And storms that darkly rise,
As o’er life’s vast and dangerous sea
My frail bark lightly flies.
With Thee my soul securely rests
From evil’s blight restored;
And isles of green and fragrant seas
Bring peace and sweet reward.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dear_saviour_thou_art_mine.php

Dear Saviour, Thou art mine,
How sweet the thought to me!
Let me repeat Thy name,
And lift my heart to Thee.

Refrain:
Mine! mine! mine!
I know Thou art mine;
Saviour, dear Saviour,
I know Thou art mine.

Thou art the sinner's Friend,
So I Thy friendship claim,
A sinner saved by grace
When Thy sweet message came.

My hardened heart was touched;
Thy pard'ning voice I heard;
And joy and peace came in
While list'ning to Thy Word.

So let me sing Thy praise,
So let me call Thee mine;
I cannot doubt Thy Word,
I know that I am Thine. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dear_shepherd_of_thy_people_hear.php

Dear Shepherd of Thy people, hear;
Thy presence now display;
As Thou hast given a place for prayer,
So give us hearts to pray.

O Lord, our languid souls inspire,
For here, we trust, thou art!
Send down a coal of heav’nly fire,
To warm each waiting heart.

Show us some token of Thy love,
Our fainting hope to raise;
And pour Thy blessings from above,
That we may render praise.

Within these walls let holy peace
And love and concord dwell;
Here give the troubled conscience ease,
The wounded spirit heal.

The feeling heart, the melting eye,
The humble mind bestow;
And shine upon us from on high,
To make our graces grow!

May we in faith receive Thy Word,
In faith present our prayers;
And, in the presence of our Lord,
Unbosom all our cares.

And may the Gospel’s joyful sound
Enforced by mighty grace,
Awaken many sinners round,
To come and fill the place.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dear_to_the_heart_of_the_shepherd.php

Dear to the heart of the Shepherd,
Dear are the sheep of His fold;
Dear is the love that He gives them,
Dearer than silver or gold.
Dear to the heart of the Shepherd,
Dear are His “other" lost sheep;
Over the mountains He follows,
Over the waters so deep.
Refrain

Out in the desert they wander,
Hungry and helpless and cold;
Off to the rescue He hastens,
Bringing them back to the fold.

Dear to the heart of the Shepherd,
Dear are the lambs of His fold;
Some from the pastures are straying,
Hungry and helpless and cold.
See, the good Shepherd is seeking,
Seeking the lambs that are lost;
Bringing them in with rejoicing,
Saved at such infinite cost.

Refrain

Dear to the heart of the Shepherd,
Dear are the “ninety and nine";
Dear are the sheep that have wandered,
Out in the desert to pine.
Hark! He is earnestly calling,
Tenderly pleading today;
“Will you not seek for My lost ones,
Off from My shelter astray?"

Refrain

Green are the pastures inviting,
Sweet are the waters and “still";
Lord, we will answer Thee gladly,
“Yes, blessèd Master, we will!
Make us Thy true under-shepherds,
Give us a love that is deep;
Send us out into the desert,
Seeking Thy wandering sheep."

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dearest_jesu_we_are_here.php

Dearest Jesu, we are here,
At Thy call, Thy presence owning;
Pleading now in holy fear
That Thy sacrifice atoning;
Word incarnate, much in wonder
On this mystery deep we ponder.

Under forms of bread and wine
Simple hearts in faith adore Thee:
Born of Mary, Son divine,
Low we bow the knee before Thee
Opening heart alike and coffer,
Body, soul, to Thee we offer.

Jesu, strong to save—the same
Yesterday, today, for ever—
Make us fear and love Thy Name,
Serving Thee with best endeavor;
In this life, O ne’er forsake us,
But to bliss hereafter take us.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dearest_jesus_draw_thou_near_me.php

Dearest Jesus, draw Thou near me,
Let Thy Spirit dwell with mine;
Open now my ear to hear Thee,
Take my heart and seal it Thine;
Keep me, lead me on my way,
Thee to follow and obey,
E’er to do Thy will and fear Thee,
And rejoice to know and hear Thee.

Underneath Thy wings abiding,
In Thy Church, O Savior dear,
Let me dwell, in Thee confiding,
Hold me in Thy faith and fear;
Take away from me each thought
That with wickedness is fraught,
Tempting me to disobey Thee,
Root it out, O Lord, I pray Thee.

Thou, earth’s greatest joy and gladness,
And salvation, full and free,
Let Thy presence cheer my sadness,
And prepare my soul for Thee!
In the hour when I depart,
Touch my spirit, lips and heart,
With Thy Word assure, uphold me
Till the heav’nly gates enfold me.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dearest_of_all_the_names_above.php

Dearest of all the names above,
My Jesus, and my God,
Who can resist Thy heav’nly love,
Or trifle with Thy blood?

’Tis by the merits of Thy death
The Father smiles again;
’Tis by Thine interceding breath
The Spirit dwells with men.

Till God in human flesh I see,
My thoughts no comfort find;
The holy, just, and sacred Three
Are terrors to my mind.

But if Immanuel’s face appear,
My hope, my joy begins;
His Name forbids my slavish fear,
His grace removes my sins.

While Jews on their own law rely,
And Greeks of wisdom boast,
I love th’incarnate mystery
And there I fix my trust.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dearest_savior_help_thy_servant.php

1. Dearest Savior, help thy servant
To proclaim thy wondrous love!
Pour thy grace upon this people,
That thy truth they may approve;
Bless, O bless them, Bless O bless them
From thy shining courts above.

2. Now thy gracious word invites them
To partake the gospel feast;
Let thy Spirit sweetly draw them 
Every soul be Jesus guest!
O receive us, O receive us.
Let us find the promised rest.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/death_and_resurrection.php

Low in the grave He sleeps,
Cold in the tomb,
Now o’er my Savior sweeps
Death’s sable gloom.
Hark! I hear an angel voice:
“He is not here, He’s risen." 

Refrain:
Glory! glory! shout the joyful strain!
Christ is risen, evermore to reign!
Hallelujah! shout with every breath!
Christ has triumphed over death. 

Closed are His pilgrim toils,
Suffering one,
Death now around Him coils
God’s only Son.
Hark! I hear an angel voice:
“He is not here, He’s risen." 

Just as the dawn is seen,
With anxious feet
Comes Mary Magdalene
With spices sweet.
Hark! I hear an angel voice:
“He is not here, He’s risen." 

Jesus has conquered death,
Shout the glad strain!
Burst He its mighty bars,
Risen to reign.
Hark! I hear an angel voice:
“He is not here, He’s risen." 
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/death_hath_no_terrors.php

Death hath no terrors for the blood bought one,
O glory hallelujah to the Lamb!
The boasted vict’ry of the grave is gone,
O glory hallelujah to the Lamb!
Refrain

Jesus rose from the dead,
Rose triumphant as He said,
Snatched the vict’ry from the grave,
Rose again our souls to save—
O glory hallelujah to the Lamb!

Our souls die daily to the world and sin,
O glory hallelujah to the Lamb!
By the Spirit’s power as He dwells within,
O glory hallelujah to the Lamb!

Refrain

We seek a city far beyond this vale,
O glory hallelujah to the Lamb!
Where joys celestial never, never fail,
O glory hallelujah to the Lamb!

Refrain

We’ll then press forward to the heav’nly land,
O glory hallelujah to the Lamb!
Nor mind the troubles met on ev’ry hand,
O glory hallelujah to the Lamb!

Refrain

We’ll rise some day just as our Savior rose,
O glory hallelujah to the Lamb!
Till then shall death be but a calm repose,
O glory hallelujah to the Lamb!

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/death_is_only_a_dream.php

Sadly we sing and with tremulous breath 
As we stand by the mystical stream
In the valley and by the dark river of death
And yet 'tis no more than a dream. 

Chorus: 
Only a dream, only a dream
Of glory beyond the dark stream
How peaceful the slumber, how happy the waking
Where death is only a dream. 

Why should we weep when the weary ones rest
In the bosom of Jesus supreme
In the mansions of glory prepared for the blest
For death is no more than a dream. 

Chorus: 

Naught in the river the Saints shall appall
Tho' it frightfully dismal may seem
In the arms of our Savior no ill can befall
They find it no more than a dream. 

Over the turbid and on rushing tide
Doth the light of eternity gleam
And the ransomed the darkness and storm shall out ride
To wake with glad smiles from their dream. 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/deceit_and_falsehood_i_abhor.php

Deceit and falsehood I abhor,
But love Thy law, Thy truth revealed;
My steadfast hope is in Thy Word;
Thou art my Refuge and my Shield;
The paths of sin I have not trod,
But kept the precepts of my God.

According to Thy gracious Word
Uphold me, Lord, deliver me;
O do not let me be ashamed
Of patient hope and trust in Thee;
O hold Thou me, and I shall stand
And ever follow Thy command.

The froward Thou hast set at naught
Who vainly wander from the right;
The wicked Thou dost count as dross;
Thy just decrees are my delight;
For fear of Thee I stand in awe
And reverence Thy most holy law.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/decision.php

If pathless forests meet my view,
I will not doubt or fear;
What has been done that I can do,
My way shall be made clear.
Refrain

I’ve decided, Lord, that I will follow Thee,
Anywhere, anywhere,
Over the land or over the sea,
It matters not where it may be,
For I’ve decided, Lord, to follow Thee,
Anywhere.

No trackless plain my faith can dim,
Despite its vast domain;
But with my faith made strong in Him,
I’ll sing my glad refrain.

Refrain

No sea too deep nor wide for me,
With faith shall I embark;
For He Who walked on Galilee
Will safely guide my bark.

Refrain

So anywhere and everywhere
In pleasure, woe or pain;
My cross alone I do not bear,
Nor do I trust in vain.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/deck_thyself_my_soul_with_gladness.php

Deck thyself, my soul, with gladness,
Leave the gloomy haunts of sadness;
Come into the daylight’s splendor,
There with joy thy praises render
Unto Christ Whose grace unbounded
Hath this wondrous banquet founded.
Higher o’er all the heav’ns He reigneth,
Yet to dwell with thee He deigneth.

Hasten as a bride to meet Him
And with loving reverence greet Him;
For with words of life immortal
Now He knocketh at thy portal.
Haste to ope the gates before Him,
Saying, while thou dost adore Him,
Suffer, Lord, that I receive Thee,
And I nevermore will leave Thee.

He who craves a precious treasure
Neither cost nor pain will measure;
But the priceless gifts of heaven
God to us hath freely given.
Though the wealth of earth were offered,
Naught would buy the gifts here offered:
Christ’s true body, for thee riven,
And His blood, for thee once given.

Ah, how hungers all my spirit
For the love I do not merit!
Oft have I, with sighs fast thronging,
Thought upon this food with longing,
In the battle well nigh worsted,
For this cup of life have thirsted,
For the Friend Who here invites us
And to God Himself unites us.

In my heart I find ascending
Holy awe, with rapture blending,
As this mystery I ponder,
Filling all my soul with wonder,
Bearing witness at this hour
Of the greatness of God’s power;
Far beyond all human telling
Is the power within Him dwelling.

Human reason, though it ponder,
Cannot fathom this great wonder
That Christ’s body e’er remaineth
Though it countless souls sustaineth
And that He His blood is giving
With the wine we are receiving.
These great mysteries unsounded
Are by God alone expounded.

Sun, Who all my life dost brighten,
Light, Who dost my soul enlighten;
Joy the best that any knoweth;
Fount, whence all my being floweth;
At Thy feet I cry, my Maker,
Let me be a fit partaker
Of this blessèd food from heaven,
For our good, Thy glory, given.

Lord, by love and mercy driven
Thou hast left Thy throne in heaven
On the cross for me to languish
And to die in bitter anguish,
To forego all joy and gladness
And to shed Thy blood in sadness.
By this blood redeemed and living,
Lord, I praise Thee with thanksgiving.

Jesus, Bread of Life, I pray Thee,
Let me gladly here obey Thee.
By Thy love I am invited,
Be Thy love with love requited;
From this supper let me measure,
Lord, how vast and deep love’s treasure.
Through the gifts Thou here dost give me
As Thy guest in heaven receive me.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/decoration_day.php

When it's decoration day up in Heaven
There's a bouquet I'm longing to see
There's a flower somewhere in this bouquet
That means all the world to me. 

Now tonight the old home place is lonely
Since Mother has been called away
And I know I can never more see her
Til we meet on that decoration day


When it's decoration day up in Heaven
There's a bouquet I'm longing to see
There's a flower somewhere in this bouquet
That means all the world to me. 


I remember the night the angels called her
To live on that beautiful shore
And it left us so lonely here without her
It can never be home anymore. 


When it's decoration day up in Heaven
There's a bouquet I'm longing to see
There's a flower somewhere in this bouquet
That means all the world to me. 


There's a flower somewhere in this bouquet
That means all the world to me. 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dedicated.php

Chorus:
We're dedicated to the Lord
We sing His praises and we teach His word
If you're wond'ring what we're trying to say
We're dedicated, dedicated to stay

Jesus came and suffered, He died to set us free
That we could see what love is and live eternally
He is our King and Savior, He cleansed us from our sin
And by our dedication we show our love for Him

Repeat Chorus

Jesus, supreme example, we'll find no better friend
So we should be dedicated and strive to live like Him
He is the greatest servant, He washed disciples feet
And by His dedication our lives can be complete

Repeat Chorus

We're dedicated to the Lord (repeat and fade)

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/deem_not_that_thy_are_blest_alone.php

Deem not that they are blest alone
Whose days a peaceful tenor keep;
Th’anointed Son of God makes known
A blessing for the eyes that weep.

The light of smiles shall fill again
The lids that overflow with tears;
And weary hours of woe and pain
Are promises of happier years.

There is a day of sunny rest
For every dark and troubled night;
And grief shall bide an evening guest,
But joy shall come with early light.

Nor let the good man’s trust depart,
Though life its common gifts deny,
Though with a pierced and broken heart,
And spurned of men, he goes to die.

For God has marked each sorrowing day,
And numbered every secret tear;
And heaven’s long age of bliss shall pay
For all His children suffer here.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/deep_and_deeper_fell_the_shadows.php

Deep and deeper fell the shadows,
Nearer seemed the golden strand,
And my trusting heart was waiting,
Passive in my Savior’s hands;
O how brightly o’er my spirit
Came a radiance from afar,
Like the blush of early morning,
Like the rising of a star.
Refrain

I was waiting, calmly waiting,
Not a fear was in my breast;
I had trusted my Redeemer,
And in Him was now my rest.

Nearer seemed the shining portals,
But the Master said to me,
?There are sheaves that must be garnered
Ere the reaping dawns for thee;
Yet I know that thou wert weary,
And I bade thy heart repose
By a healing stream that murmurs
Where the Rose of Sharon grows.?

Refrain

In the silent hours of midnight,
When my waking thoughts take wings,
O the tranquil peace He gives me,
And the hallowed songs He brings!
He has crowned me with His blessing,
And I now by faith can say,
I am going forth with vigor,
Still rejoicing on my way.

Refrain



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/deep_and_grand_in_tones_sublime.php

Deep and grand in tones sublime,
Hear the passing bells of time,
Ring the dirge of moments dead,
Golden hours whose joys are fled—
Still those bells of time we hear,
Tolling, tolling: Hark! the word:
Refrain

Eternity!
Eternity!
Eternity!

In the rosy morning fair,
In the sultry noonday glare,
In the dewy evening bright,
In the silent hush of night—
Still those bells of time we hear,
Tolling, tolling, loud and clear:

Refrain

When with breaking heart we bend,
O’er a tried and faithful friend,
When the parting hour draws nigh,
And we catch the last “goodbye"—
Still those bells of time we hear,
Tolling, tolling, loud and clear:

Refrain

Precious word! if safe we stand
On the Christian’s borderland
Trusting Him, Whose loving smile
Lights and cheers us all the while—
Bells of time with joy we hear,
Tolling, tolling, sweet and clear:

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/deeper_and_deeper.php

Into the heart of Jesus
Deeper and deeper I go,
Seeking to know the reason
Why He should love me so,
Why He should stoop to lift me
Up from the miry clay,
Saving my soul, making me whole,
Though I had wandered away.

Into the will of Jesus,
Deeper and deeper I go,
Praying for grace to follow,
Seeking His way to know;
Bowing in full surrender
Low at His blessèd feet,
Bidding Him take, break me and make,
Till I am molded, complete.

Into the cross of Jesus
Deeper and deeper I go,
Following through the garden,
Facing the dreaded foe;
Drinking the cup of sorrow,
Sobbing with broken heart,
“O Savior, help! Dear Savior, help!
Grace for my weakness impart."

Into the joy of Jesus
Deeper and deeper I go,
Rising, with soul enraptured,
Far from the world below.
Joy in the place of sorrow,
Peace in the midst of pain,
Jesus will give, Jesus will give;
He will uphold and sustain.

Into the love of Jesus

Deeper and deeper I go,
Praising the One Who brought me
Out of my sin and woe;
And through eternal ages
Gratefully I shall sing,
“O how He loved! O how He loved!
Jesus, my Lord and my King!"
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/deeper_deeper_in_the_love_of_jesus.php

Deeper deeper in the love of Jesus
Daily let me go
Higher, higher in the school of wisdom
More of grace to know
Ch: O deep...er yet I pray
And higher every day
And wiser blessed Lord
In Thy precious Holy word
Deeper, deeper, blessed Holy Spirit
Take me deeper still
Till my life is holly spent in Jesus
And His perfect will
Deeper, deeper though it cost hard trails
Deeper let me go
Rooted in the holy love of Jesus
Let me fruitful grow
Deeper, higher, every day in Jesus
Till all conflict past,
Finds me conq'ror, and His own image
Perfected at last.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/deeper_in_love.php

There is a longing only You can fill
A raging tempest only You can still
My soul is thirsty Lord to know You
As I’m known

Drink from the river that flows
Before Your throne

CHORUS

Take me deeper, deeper in love with You
Jesus hold me close in Your embrace
Take me deeper
Deeper than I’ve ever been before
I just want to love You more and more
How I long to be deeper in love

Sunrise to sunrise I will seek Your face
Drawn by the Spirit
To the promise of Your grace
My heart has found in You
A hope that will abide
Here in Your presence forever satisfied


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/deeper_yet.php

In the blood from the cross,
I have been washed from sin;
But to be free from dross,
Still I would enter in.
Refrain

Deeper yet, deeper yet,
Into the crimson flood;
Deeper yet, deeper yet,
Under the precious blood.

Day by day, hour by hour,
Blessings are sent to me;
But for more of His power,
Ever my prayer shall be.

Refrain

Near to Christ I would live,
Following Him each day;
What I ask He will give;
So then with faith I pray.

Refrain

Now I have peace, sweet peace,
While in this world of sin;
But to pray I’ll not cease
Till I am pure within.

Refrain




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/deeper_deeper.php

Deeper, deeper in the love of Jesus
Daily let me go;
Higher, higher in the school of wisdom,
More of grace to know.
Refrain

O deeper yet, I pray,
And higher every day,
And wiser, blessèd Lord,
In Thy precious, holy Word.

Deeper, deeper, blessèd Holy Spirit,
Take me deeper still,
Till my life is wholly lost in Jesus,
And His perfect will.

Refrain

Deeper, deeper! though it cost hard trials,
Deeper let me go!
Rooted in the holy love of Jesus,
Let me fruitful grow.

Refrain

Deeper, higher, every day in Jesus,
Till all conflict past,
Finds me conqu’ror, and in His own image
Perfected at last.

Refrain

Deeper, deeper in the faith of Jesus,
Holy faith and true;
In His pow’r and soul exulting wisdom
Let me peace pursue.

Refrain



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/defend_us_lord_from_every_ill.php

Defend us, Lord, from every ill;
Strengthen our hearts to do Thy will;
In all we plan and all we do,
Still keep us to Thy service true.

O let us hear the inspiring word
Which they of old at Horeb heard;
Breathe to our hearts the high command,
“Go onward and possess the land!"

Thou Who are light, shine on each soul!
Thou Who are truth, each mind control!
Open our eyes and make us see
The path which leads to Heaven and Thee!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/defending_your_life.php

          Words: Bob Allsup and Gary Ferguson © 1994 Bob Allsup
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/delay_not_o_sinner_draw_near.php

Delay not, delay not, O sinner, draw near.
The waters of life are now flowing for thee;
No price is demanded, the Savior is here;
Redemption is purchased, salvation is free.

Delay not, delay not, why longer abuse
The love and compassion of Jesus thy God?
A fountain is open, how canst thou refuse
To wash and be cleansed in His pardoning blood?

Delay not, delay not, the Spirit of grace,
Long grieved and resisted, may take His sad flight,
And leave thee in darkness to finish thy race,
To sink in the gloom of eternity’s night.

Delay not, delay not, the hour is at hand,
The earth shall dissolve, and the heavens shall fade;
The dead, small and great, in the judgment shall stand;
What helper, then, sinner, shall lend thee his aid?
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/deliver_me_from_evil.php

Deliver me from evil, preserve me, Lord, from wrong;
Against the foes that gather be Thou my Helper strong;
From those who plot to hurt me and spread the treacherous snare,
Preserve me, Lord, and keep me safeguarded in Thy care.

O Lord, I have confessed Thee to be my God alone;
O hear my supplication, and be Thy mercy shown;
O God the Lord, my Savior, my Shield amid the strife,
Let not the wicked triumph who plot against my life.

Let evil smite the evil, and cause their overthrow;
The needy and afflicted the Lord will help, I know;
Thy saints, redeemed from evil, their thanks to Thee shall give;
The righteous and the upright shall in Thy presence live.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/deliverance_will_come.php

I saw a wayworn traveler, in tattered garments clad,
And struggling up the mountain, it seemed that he was sad;
His back was laden heavy, his strength was almost gone,
Yet he shouted as he journeyed, “Deliverance will come!"
Refrain

Then palms of victory, crowns of glory,
Palms of victory I shall wear.

The summer sun was shining, the sweat was on his brow,
His garments worn and dusty, his step seemed very slow;
But he kept pressing onward, for he was wending home,
Still shouting as he journeyed, “Deliverance will come!"

Refrain

The songsters in the arbor that stood beside the way
Attracted his attention, inviting his delay:
His watchword being “Onward!" he stopped his ears and ran,
Still shouting as he journeyed, “Deliverance will come!"

Refrain

I saw him in the evening; the sun was bending low;
He’d overtopped the mountain, and reached the vale below:
He saw the Golden City—his everlasting home—
And shouted loud, “Hosanna! Deliverance will come!"

Refrain

While gazing on that city, just o’er the narrow flood,
A band of holy angels came from the throne of God;
They bore him on their pinions safe o’er the dashing foam,
And joined him in his triumph: Deliverance had come!

Refrain

I heard the song of triumph they sang upon that shore,
Saying, “Jesus has redeemed us to suffer nevermore!"
Then casting his eyes backward on the race which he had run,
He shouted loud, “Hosanna! Deliverance has come!"

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dem_bones_gonna_rise_again.php

1. Lord he thought he'd make a man
Dem bones gonna rise again
Took a little water, took a little sand
Dem bones goona rise again 

Chorus:
I know it, know it,
Indeed I know it -
Brother, I know it, Whee!
Dem bones gonna rise again. 

2. Put him in that garden fair
Dem bones gonna rise again
Saw him mighty lonely there
Dem bones gonna rise again
Chorus: 

3. Took a rib from Adam's side
Dem bones gonna rise again
Made Miss Eve to be his bride.
Dem bones gonna rise again.
Chorus: 

4. Put them in that garden fair
Dem bones gonna rise again
Saw them mighty happy there.
Dem bones gonna rise again
Chorus: 

5. Apples, peaches, pears and such
Dem bones gonna rise again
But one fruit you must not touch.
Dem bones gonna rise again
Chorus: 

6. Round that tree old Satan slunk
Dem bones gonna rise again
At Miss Eve his eye he wunk.
Dem bones gonna rise again
Chorus: 

7. My that fruit looks mighty fine
Dem bones gonna rise again
Take a bite, the Lord won't mind.
Dem bones gonna rise again
Chorus: 

8. So she took a pick and she took a pull
Dem bones gonna rise again
Then she filled her apron full.
Dem bones gonna rise again
Chorus: 

9. Next day when the Lord came round
Dem bones gonna rise again
Saw those cores all over the ground.
Dem bones gonna rise again
Chorus: 

10. Adam, Adam, where art thou?
Dem bones gonna rise again
Here I am Lord, coming now!
Dem bones gonna rise again
Chorus: 

11. Adam who these cores did leave?
Dem bones gonna rise again
Wasn't me Lord, must a been Eve.
Dem bones gonna rise again
Chorus: 

12. Adam you must leave this place
Dem bones gonna rise again
Earn your bread by the sweat of your face.
Dem bones gonna rise again
Chorus: 

13. So he took a pick and he took a plow
Dem bones gonna rise again
And that's why we're all singing now.
Dem bones gonna rise again
Chorus: 

14. This is the end, there ain't no more
Dem bones gonna rise again
Eve got the apple, Adam got the core.
Dem bones gonna rise again
Chorus: 

15. Moral of the story be
Dem bones gonna rise again
Don't leave your cores for the Lord to see.
Dem bones gonna rise again
Chorus: 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/depending_on_the_blood.php

On the golden streets of heaven all men hope to walk some day,
Yet so many are not willing to accept the living way;
But while others build on good works, or opinions if they may,
Hallelujah! hallelujah!
I'm depending on the blood.

Refrain:
In the soul-cleansing blood of the Saviour,
I've been washed in the crimson flood;
Tho' the world may say there is hope some other way,
I'm depending on the blood.

Some will tell us that God's mercy is their only hope and plea,
That a soul He could not punish throughout all eternity;
But I read that my dear Saviour died for sinners just like me,
Hallelujah! hallelujah!
I'm depending on the blood.

As we look back thro' the ages where the kings and prophets trod,
We may see their altars reeking with the sacrifice and blood;
But those types were only pointing to the Paschal Lamb of God,
Hallelujah! hallelujah!
I'm depending on the blood.

'Tis the burden of that chorus over on the streets of light,
That the blood from Calv'ry's mountain has washed all their garments white;
So I'll shout along life's pathway till I reach that land so bright:
"Hallelujah! hallelujah!
I'm depending on the blood." 
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/depth_of_mercy.php

Depth of mercy! Can there be
Mercy still reserved for me?
Can my God His wrath forbear,
Me, the chief of sinners, spare?

I have long withstood His grace,
Long provoked Him to His face,
Would not hearken to His calls,
Grieved Him by a thousand falls.

I have spilt His precious blood,
Trampled on the Son of God,
Filled with pangs unspeakable,
I, who yet am not in hell!

I my Master have denied,
I afresh have crucified,
And profaned His hallowed Name,
Put Him to an open shame.

Whence to me this waste of love?
Ask my Advocate above!
See the cause in Jesus’ face,
Now before the throne of grace.

Jesus, answer from above,
Is not all Thy nature love?
Wilt Thou not the wrong forget,
Permit me to kiss Thy feet?

If I rightly read Thy heart,
If Thou all compassion art,
Bow Thine ear, in mercy bow,
Pardon and accept me now.

Jesus speaks, and pleads His blood!
He disarms the wrath of God;
Now my Father’s mercies move,
Justice lingers into love.

Kindled His relentings are,
Me He now delights to spare,
Cries, “How shall I give thee up?"
Lets the lifted thunder drop.

Lo! I still walk on the ground:
Lo! an Advocate is found:
“Hasten not to cut Him down,
Let this barren soul alone."

There for me the Savior stands,
Shows His wounds and spreads His hands.
God is love! I know, I feel;
Jesus weeps and loves me still.

Pity from Thine eye let fall,
By a look my soul recall;
Now the stone to flesh convert,
Cast a look, and break my heart.

Now incline me to repent,
Let me now my sins lament,
Now my foul revolt deplore,
Weep, believe, and sin no more.


 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/desire_of_heaven.php

When I am taken from this world of sadness,
With what joy I'll seek the skies!
Jesus I'll hasten to thine arms with gladness,
Heav'n is all I seek or prize.

Blest abode, fair Sion loved and cherished,
When earthly joys have faded and perished,
Oh let me Thy splendors behold,
Then let me taste thy joys untold;
Then let me taste thy joys untold,
Then let me taste thy joys untold.

Quickly depart! oh cruel momments hasten!
Shall mine exile ne'er have end?
When shall these sorrows cease my heart to chasten?
Jesus soon Thy summons send.

Blest abode, fair Sion loved and cherished,
When earthly joys have faded and perished,
Oh let me Thy splendors behold,
Then let me taste thy joys untold;
Then let me taste thy joys untold,
Then let me taste thy joys untold.

Heaven has no sadness, sorrow or sighing,
There I'll mourn and weep no more;
There is no grief, no sickness or dying
On that bright unfading shore.

Blest abode, fair Sion loved and cherished,
When earthly joys have faded and perished,
Oh let me Thy splendors behold,
Then let me taste thy joys untold;
Then let me taste thy joys untold,
Then let me taste thy joys untold.

Ever more I hear their angel voices pealing,
From my soul soft echoes rise;
Brightly around me dreams of bliss are stealing
Of my home beyond the skies.

Blest abode, fair Sion loved and cherished,
When earthly joys have faded and perished,
Oh let me Thy splendors behold,
Then let me taste thy joys untold;
Then let me taste thy joys untold,
Then let me taste thy joys untold.


 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/desire_of_the_nations.php

Jesus, you are the light of every nation
King of your creation and you reign
Jesus, you hold the kingdoms and the powers
The glory in this hour and you reign

Jesus, Prince of Peace
Your kingdom will never cease

Desire of the nations
Our great expectation
Lord, come fill this house with your glory
Desire of the nations
Our heart's invitation
Come fill this house with your glory

The kingdoms of this world are becoming 
The kingdoms of our Lord

© 2001 Vineyard Songs (Canada)
CCLI #1596342


 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/devotion.php

You are boundless mercy
You are endless grace
You are sweet forgiveness
Ceaseless faithfulness
Washing over me

You are sovereign Father
You are healing King
You are tender Savior
Righteous offering
Poured out for me

And I surrender to you
Lord I'm yielding all I am to you
You have captivated me
And I come to give my devotion

© 2000 Vineyard Songs (UK/Eire)
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/diamond_in_my_crown.php

As each long day rolls by and falls behind me
In the lonely night there's a peacefulness I've found
Though I'm weary even then when I rise to start again
There'll be a diamond, a diamond in my crown.

I have wasted all that life has laid before me
I have watched as all the green fields turned to brown
But I shall not disavow all these ties that bind me now
There'll be a diamond, a diamond in my crown


Bridge:
Shining down some day I know
Brighter than all their streets of gold
When the burdens that I carry I will lay down
And the sorrows I have known 
I'll see them all be overthrown
There'll be a diamond, a diamond in my crown.


With the passing of the years I will grow stronger
Just as sure as this old world keeps spinning round
Then the closer I will be to my Sweetest Victory
There'll be a diamond, a diamond in my crown
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/diamonds_in_the_rough.php

While walking out one ev'ning, not knowing where to go
Just to pass the time away before we held our show
I heard the Bethal's mission band they sang with all their might
I gave my heart to Jesus and I left the show that night. 

Chorus: 
The day will soon be over and digging will be done
No more gems to be gathered now so let us all press on
When Jesus comes to claim us all and says it is enough
The diamonds will be shining but no longer in the rough. 

One day my precious comrades, you too were lost in sin
And others sought to rescue but 'twas Jesus took you in
And when you're tired and tempted too and scoffed by sin's rebuff
Don't turn away in anger you're a diamond in the rough. 

Chorus: 

While reading through the Bible, what wondrous sites I see
I read of Peter, James and John, by the sea of Galilee
And Jesus, when He found them there He found them very tough
And they were precious diamonds that He gathered in the rough. 

Chorus: 

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/did_christ_oer_sinners_weep.php

Did Christ o’er sinners weep,
And shall our cheeks be dry?
Let floods of penitential grief
Burst forth from every eye.

The Son of God in tears
The wondering angels see:
Be thou astonished, O my soul;
He shed those tears for thee.

He wept that we might weep;
Each sin demands a tear;
In heaven alone no sin is found,
And there’s no weeping there.


 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/did_christ_the_great_example_lead.php

1. Did Christ the Great Example Lead

For all His humble train,

In washing the disciples' feet,

And wiping them again?


2. And did my Lord and Master say,

"If I have washed your feet,

Ye also ought to watch and pray,

And wash each other's feet?"


3. O blessed Jesus, at thy board

I have thy children met;

The bread I've broke, the wine I've poured

We've washed each other's feet


4. In imitation of my Lord,

Who blood for me did sweat,

I yield unto His sacred word

And wash the pilgrim's feet.


5. Yes, blessed Jesus, I like thee.

Would Christians often meet;

The least of all the flock would be.

And wash His children's feet.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/did_you_think_to_pray.php

Ere you left your room this morning,
Did you think to pray?
In the name of Christ our Savior,
Did you sue for loving favor,
As a shield today?
Refrain

O how praying rests the weary!
Prayer will change the night to day;
So when life seems dark and dreary,
Don’t forget to pray.

When you met with great temptation,
Did you think to pray?
By His dying love and merit,
Did you claim the Holy Spirit
As your guide and stay?

Refrain

When your heart was filled with anger,
Did you think to pray?
Did you plead for grace, my brother,
That you might forgive another
Who had crossed your way?

Refrain

When sore trials came upon you,
Did you think to pray?
When your soul was bowed in sorrow,
Balm of Gilead did you borrow
At the gates of day?

Refrain



 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/didnt_it_rain.php

Forty days forty nights when the rain kept fallin’,
The wicked climb the tree, and for help kept a callin’,
For they heard the waters wailin’,
Didn’t it rain, rain,
Didn’t it rain!
Tell me Noah didn’t it rain!

Some climb the mountain, some climb the hill,
Some started sailin’ an’ a rowin’ with a will;
Some tried swimming an’ I guess they’re swimmin’ still.
For they heard the waters roarin’!
Didn’t it rain, rain,
Didn’t it rain!
Tell me Noah didn’t it rain!

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/difference.php

Words: Jason Overstreet © 2003

Lyrics:

Sometimes I’m lazy and drag my feet, my walk becomes a crawl
Motivation I had takes a hike, standards begin to fall
I’m a child of the King that has a nice ring, should be changin’ lives you see
Well I’m feeling lazy and sittin’ around
Well it’s easier to me

Chorus 1:
How did Daniel face the lions?
How did Moses part the sea?
How did Noah build that ark?
What’s so wrong with me?
If it’s faith Lord I’m missing, could You show me some right now?
If I need to catch a glimpse of You, could You show me Yourself now?

Six a.m. and then I’m hitting snooze, time to face another day
Two paths to choose mine or His
Will I follow or will I stray?
I wanna make a difference, to invest in eternity
(Without You) Without You I’m inadequate and powerless to succeed

Repeat Chorus

Callin’ out for Your wisdom, for the moving of Your hand
Asking You for Your guidance and the courage to take a stand

That’s how Daniel faced the lions, and Moses split that sea
That’s how I’ll make a difference, by the Spirit of God in me
If it’s faith Lord I’m missin’, could You show me some right now?
If I need to catch a glimpse of You, could You show me Yourself now?
Callin’ out for Your wisdom, for the moving of Your hand (moving of Your hand)
Asking You for Your guidance and the courage to take a stand

Chorus 2:
How did Daniel (How did Daniel)?
Moses, how did Moses?
Noah, He built that ark
And what’s so wrong with me?
If it’s faith Lord I’m missing, could You show me some right now? (I need some 
now)
If I need to catch a glimpse of You, could You show me Yourself now?

How can I make a difference?

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dig_a_little_deeper.php

Nearer to Thee (nearer to Thee), I long to be (I long to be)
I want to dig a little deeper in the storehouse (of) of His love, eternal love
I want to shine (I want to shine), with love divine (with love divine)
I want to dig a little deeper in the storehouse (of) of His love, eternal love

Chorus 1:
I want to dig a little deeper (down) in God’s love
I want to dig a little deeper (down) in God’s love
I want to dig a little deeper in the storehouse (of) of His love, eternal love
I want to talk, a little more like my Jesus would
I want to walk, just like a Christian should
I want to dig a little deeper in the storehouse (of) of His love, eternal love

Repeat Chorus 1

I want to do (I want to do) what’s always true (what's always true)
I want to dig a little deeper in the storehouse (of) of His love, eternal love
Each passing hour (each passing hour), I want more power (I want more power)
I want to dig a little deeper in the storehouse (of) of His love, eternal love

Repeat Chorus 1

Chorus 2:
I want to dig a little deeper (down) in God’s love (dig, dig, dig)
I want to dig a little deeper (down) in God’s love (dig, dig, dig)
I want to dig a little deeper in the storehouse (of) of His love, eternal love
I want to talk (hooo), a little more like my Jesus would
I want to walk, just like a Christian should
I want to dig a little deeper in the storehouse (of) of His love, eternal love

Repeat Chorus 2

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dig_down_deep.php

Words and music: Gary Miller © 1994 Anthony K. Music (ASCAP)

Lyrics: 

See a nation filled with complication
See a people burdened down
Feel a need for permanent solutions
See a need for lost ones to be found 

Chorus:
Dig down deep to the solid rock
Build your house on the firm foundation
It's so sweet to find your home in Him
Safe and sound when troubles come around 

See a heart that's in a sad condition
See a life that's burdened down
Feel the need for heavenly tradition
Feel the need by turning lives around 

Repeat Chorus 

Bridge:
When the trouble comes (dig down)
A firm foundation (dig down)
When you feel alone (dig down)
The rock of ages (dig down)
You need a friend (dig down)
He is your brother (dig down)
You're needing hope (dig down)
He's the one! (dig down) 

Dig, dig deep (dig, dig, dig down deep)
Gonna find that it's a firm foundation (dig, dig, dig down deep)
It's so sweet to put your trust in Him (dig, dig, dig down deep)
(dig, dig, dig down deep) 

See a place of joy and jubiliation
See a throne we join around
Feel the need for holy celebration
Feel the need to share what we've found (share what we have found) 

Dig down deep
Dig down deep
Dig down deep (it's so sweet yeah)
Dig down deep (come, join, come and join us)
Dig down deep (dig down)
Build your house upon the firm foundation
Dig down deep (dig down deep)
Yeah, when troubles come around
Dig down deep


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/ding_dong_merrily_on_high.php

Ding dong! Merrily on high, in Heav’n the bells are ringing,
Ding dong! Verily the sky is riv’n with angel singing.
Gloria, hosannah in the highest!

E’en so here below, below, let steeple bells be swungen,
And io, io, io, by priest and people sungen.
Gloria, hosannah in the highest!

Pray ye dutifully, prime your matin chime, ye ringers;
May ye beautifully rime your evetime song, ye singers.
Gloria, hosannah in the highest!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/disciples_of_all_nations.php

Disciples of all nations,
The Lord calls us to make,
Baptizing new believers
And making idols shake.
He shows us the examples,
Of how we should respond,
In Scripture stories glorious
Of servants now long gone.

Like Samuel in the temple,
When came the midnight call,
Obedient to his master,
He hurried down the hall.
Not fully understanding,
Ignoring any fears,
He gave courageous answer,
“Speak, Lord, Your servant hears."

Like Gideon of Manasseh,
We think ourselves too small,
But God the Lord is with us,
A tower that cannot fall.
We need no mighty army,
No weapons made of man;
Watch God supply the helpers,
And then reveal the plan.

As Abraham gave Isaac,
As parents so may we
Be asked to give our children
For service full and free.
If asked, then, do not falter,
But send them on their way
To spread the wondrous tidings,
That night may turn to day.

As Moses stood in Egypt,
And God gave words to speak,
So will He give us boldness,
Though we be frail and weak.
His Spirit will empower us
To reach the sinner’s heart
And bring the lost to Jesus,
As destined from the start.

Like Samson consecrated,
If we stay true to God,
He gives us strength and power,
The Spirit’s mighty rod.
But if we fall away, then,
Our weakness will return;
So pray, stay loyal, faithful,
And God His might will lend.

Like Paul, there may be suffering,
And heavy the demands,
But heed not the rejection,
And hold to His commands.
“Teach all that I have taught you,
As witnesses be true;
Tell all the world My Gospel,
And I will be with you."


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dismis_me_not_thy_service.php

Dismiss me not Thy service, Lord,
But train me for Thy will;
For even I, in fields so broad,
Some duties may fulfill;
And I will ask for no reward,
Except to serve Thee still.

How many serve, how many more
May to the service come;
To tend the vines, the grapes to store,
Thou dost appoint for some;
Thou hast Thy young men at the war,
Thy little ones at home.

All works are good, and each is best
As most it pleases Thee;
Each worker pleases, when the rest
He serves in charity;
And neither man nor work unblest
Wilt Thou permit to be.

Our Master all the work hath done
He asks of us today;
Sharing his service, every one
Share too His Sonship may:
Lord, I would serve and be a son;
Dismiss me not, I pray.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/disposer_supreme_and_judge_of_the_earth.php

Disposer supreme, and Judge of the earth,
Who choosest for Thine the weak and the poor;
To frail earthen vessels and things of no worth
Entrusting Thy riches which aye shall endure.

Those vessels soon fail, though full of Thy light,
And at Thy decree, are broken and gone;
Thence brightly appeareth Thy truth in its might,
As through the clouds riven the lightnings have shone.

Like clouds they are borne to do Thy great will,
And swift as the winds about the world go;
The Word with His wisdom their spirits doth fill,
They thunder, they lighten, the waters o’erflow.

Their sound goeth forth, “Christ Jesus the Lord";
Then Satan doth fear, his citadels fall;
As when the dread trumpets went worth at Thy Word,
And one long blast shattered the Canaanite’s wall.

O loud be their trump, and stirring their sound,
To rouse us, O Lord, from slumber of sin;
The lights Thou hast kindled in darkness around,
O may they illumine our spirits within.

All honor and praise, dominion and might,
To God, Three in One, eternally be;
Who round us hath shed His own marvelous light,
And called us from darkness His glory to see.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dives_and_lazarus.php

As it fell out upon one day,
Rich Divès made a feast,
And he invited all his friends,
And gentry of the best.

Then Lazarus laid him down and down
And down at Divès’ door:
“Some meat and drink, brother, Diverus,
Bestow upon the poor."

“Thou’rt none of my brothers, Lazarus,
That liest begging at my door;
No meat, nor drink will I give thee,
Nor bestow upon the poor."

Then Lazarus laid him down and down,
All under Divès’ wall:
“Some meat, some drink, brother Diverus,
For hunger starve I shall."

“Thou’rt none of my brothers, Lazarus,
That liest begging at my gate;
No meat, no drink will I give thee,
For Jesus Christ His sake."

Then Divès sent out his hungry dogs,
To bite him as he lay;
They hadn’t the power to bite one bite,
But licked his sores away.

Then Divès sent to his merry men,
To worry poor Lazarus away;
They’d not the power to strike one stroke,
But flung their whips away.

As it fell out upon one day,
Poor Lazarus sickened and died;
There came two angels out of heaven,
His soul therein to guide.

“Rise up! rise up! brother Lazarus,
And go along with me;
For you’ve a place prepared in heaven,
To sit on an angel’s knee."

As it fell out upon one day,
Rich Divès sickened and died;
There came two serpents out of hell,
His soul therein to guide.

“Rise up! rise up! brother Diverus,
And come along with me;
There is a place provided in hell
For wicked men like thee."

Then Divès looked up with his eyes
And saw poor Lazarus blest;
“Give me one drop of water, brother Lazarus,
To quench my flaming thirst."

“O, was I now but alive again
The space of one half hour!
O, that I had my peace again
Then the devil should have no power."



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/do_all_the_good_you_can.php

Onward go the sunbeams,
Shining all the day;
Looking down upon us,
Now they seem to say:
Let your smile be cheerful,
Ever warm and bright,
Make the hearts around you
Happy with its light.
Refrain

Marching on together,
Thro’ this fleeting world below,
Helping one another
Onward as we go;
Think of what a blessing,
God the Father gave to man,
Try and do for others
All the good you can;
Let your smile be cheerful,
Ever warm and bright,
Make the hearts around you
Happy with its light.

Hearts and hands to Jesus,
Gladly we will give,
In the path of duty,
Walking while we live;
Cheering on the sad ones,
Lifting those that fall,
Shining like the sunbeams,
Doing good to all.

Refrain

With a loving spirit,
While the days are bright,
Let us work rejoicing,
Till the dewy night;
Grateful for the blessings
Jesus brought to man,
Let us do for others
All the good we can.

Refrain




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/do_i_trust_you.php

Sometimes my little heart can’t understand
What’s in Your will what’s in Your plan
So many times I’m tempted to ask You why
But I can never forget it for long
Lord what You do could not be wrong
So I believe You even when I must cry

Chorus:
Do I trust You Lord does the robin sing
Do I trust You Lord does it rain in Spring
You can see my heart You can read my mind
And You’ve got to know I would rather die
Than to lose my faith in the One I love
Do I trust You Lord?
Do I trust You?

I know the answers I’ve given them all
But suddenly now I feel so small
Shaken down to the cavity in my soul
I know the doctrine and theology
But right now they don’t mean much to me
This time there’s only one thing I’ve got to know

Chorus 2:
Do I trust You Lord does the river flow
Do I trust You Lord does the North wind blow
You can see my heart You can read my mind
And You’ve got to know I would rather die
Than to lose my faith in the One I love
Do I trust You Lord
Do I trust you

Chorus 3:
I will trust You Lord when I don’t know why
I will trust You Lord ‘til the day I die
I will trust You Lord when I’m blind with pain
You were God before and You’ll never change
I will trust You, I will trust You Lord
I will trust You Lord
I will trust You, I will trust You Lord
I will trust You Lord
I will trust You, I will trust You Lord
I will trust You Lord


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/do_no_sinful_action.php

Do no sinful action,
Speak no angry word;
Ye belong to Jesus,
Children of the Lord.

Christ is kind and gentle,
Christ is pure and true;
And His little children
Must be holy, too.

There’s a wicked spirit
Watching round you still,
And he tries to tempt you
To all harm and ill.

But ye must not hear him,
Though ’tis hard for you
To resist the evil,
And the good to do.

For ye promised truly,
In your infant days,
To renounce him wholly,
And forsake his ways.

Ye are newborn Christians,
Ye must learn to fight
With the bad within you,
And to do the right.

Christ is your own Master,
He is good and true,
And His little children
Must be holy, too.




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/do_not_be_afraid.php

Words and music: Keith Lancaster, Gary Moyers, Duane Adams, Steve Reischl, and 
Robert C. Guy © 1995 Anthony K. Music (ASCAP)

Lyrics: 

Chorus:
Do not be afraid, for I am with you
Do not be afraid, declares the Lord
Do not be afraid, for I am with you
And will rescue you forever more 

Moses led his band to the promised land
Everyone was scared that there'd be a fight
So they sent some men to see if they would win
If they were to challenge the Canaanites
Ten of the men were afraid of that land
Thinking they would be better off dead
Caleb and Joshua had different thoughts
And this is what they said, they said. . .

Repeat Chorus

Jeremiah floored himself before the Lord
God had told him that he was set apart
He would be God's hand, a prophet to the land
He should do all that the Lord commands
Jeremiah said, "I am only a boy
And I don't even konw the right words"
The Lord reached down and touched his mouth
And this is what he heard

Repeat Chorus

Bridge:
I can't see far ahead of me
Dark storms cloud my view
Take courage and you will see
Give it to God and he will rescue you

Repeat Chorus (x2) 

And will rescue you forever
And will rescue you forever
And will resuce you forevermore
Evermore




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/do_not_be_surprised.php

Do not be surprised at the suffering you bear;
It’s not something strange, so you must not despair.
Rejoice that you share with Christ and His sufferings know;
When He comes in glory, your joy will o’erflow.
Refrain

If God should will that you suffer ill,
Commit yourself gladly His will to fulfill.

If you are insulted because of Christ’s Name,
You’re blessed, for God’s Spirit on you will remain.
Your suffering should never be for what deserves blame;
But if for your faith you’re hurt, be not ashamed.

Refrain

God’s judgment will start with His own family.
What then will the outcome for godless men be?
In spite of your suffering, do good to all men;
For God will be faithful to you to the end.

Refrain



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/do_not_i_love_thee_o_my_lord.php

Do not I love Thee, O my Lord?
Behold my heart and see;
And turn each cursèd idol out,
That dares to rival Thee.

Do not I love Thee, O my Lord?
Then let me nothing love;
Dead be my heart to every joy,
When Jesus cannot move.

Is not Thy Name melodious still
To mine attentive ear?
Doth not each pulse with pleasure bound
My Savior’s voice to hear?

Hast Thou a lamb in all Thy flock
I would disdain to feed?
Hast Thou a foe, before whose face
I fear Thy cause to plead?

Would not mine ardent spirit vie
With angels round the throne,
To execute Thy sacred will,
And make Thy glory known?

Would not my heart pour forth its blood
In honor of Thy Name?
And challenge the cold hand of death
To damp th’immortal flame?

Thou know’st I love Thee, dearest Lord,
But O, I long to soar
Far from the sphere of mortal joys,
And learn to love Thee more!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/do_not_wait_until_some_deed_of_greatness.php

Do not wait until some deed of greatness you may do,
Do not wait to shed your light afar,
To the many duties ever near you now be true,
Brighten the corner where you are.
Refrain

Brighten the corner where you are!
Brighten the corner where you are!
Someone far from harbor you may guide across the bar;
Brighten the corner where you are!

Just above are clouded skies that you may help to clear,
Let not narrow self your way debar;
Though into one heart alone may fall your song of cheer,
Brighten the corner where you are.

Refrain

Here for all your talent you may surely find a need,
Here reflect the bright and Morning Star;
Even from your humble hand the Bread of Life may feed,
Brighten the corner where you are.

Refrain




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/do_not_worry.php

Do not worry for your life,
What you’ll eat or drink or wear;
Is not life much more important 
Than these things that cause you care?
See the birds—they sow and reap not,
Nor in barns do store away.
Yet your heav’nly Father feeds them;
Have you not more worth than they?

And why worry about clothing?
See the lilies’ glad array;
Solomon in all his splendor
Never dressed as fine as they.
This is how God clothes the grasses,
Though their life is but a day.
Will He not much more meet your needs?
Let your faith not fade away.

So I tell you, do not worry,
Asking what you’ll eat or drink.
Nor be anxious about clothing—
These are things that all men seek.
And your Father knows you need them;
Worry won’t command His power.
Which of you by constant fretting
Adds to life a single hour?

Seek first, then, your Father’s kingdom
And His righteousness on high.
All these things will then be given;
God will not neglect your cry.
So fret not about tomorrow;
God directs the future, too.
Though each day will bring its troubles,
Trust in Him—He’ll see you through.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/do_right.php

Words and music: Paul Davis © 1980 Paul and Jonathan Songs and Web IV Music 
(BMI)

Lyrics:

Just can't keep on living like we're living
Pushing to the limits, yeah

I know that He gave His life for me
Set all our spirits free
So I wanna do right, wanna do right, I've gotta do right
I never dreamed that I could be holding you
Well He's making my dreams come true
So I wanna do right, wanna do right
I wanna do right

Chorus:
Oh, you got to do right (echo throughout: do right, do right)
Yes you gotta do right
Let Him be your guiding light
Yes you gotta do right
Let Him be your guiding light (Lord I wanna do right)
Listen to me people (Lord I wanna do right)
(Lord I wanna do right, yeah, yeah)

I used to say love was just a game we played
Now I see it in a different way
So I wanna do right (wanna do right), I gotta do right (got to do right)
And I never knew that I could be holding you
Well He's making my dreams come true
So I wanna do right, wanna do right
I wanna do right (got to, got to do right)

Repeat Chorus

Well we just can't keep on livin' like we're livin'
We just can't keep on livin' like we're livin'
We just can't keep on pushin' to the limit
We just can't keep on (pushin')
Just can't keep on livin' like we're livin' (pushin')
We just can't keep on pushin' to the limit (pushin')
We just can't keep on, keep on, keep on, keep on (pushin')

Oh, you got to do right (echo throughout: do right, do right)
Yes you gotta do right
Let Him be your guiding light
Yes you gotta do right
Let Him be your guiding light
Yes you gotta do right
You've got to, you've got to
Do right, do right


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/do_this_remember_me.php

Our Lord and His disciples at table were as one,
And Jesus thought of the morrow, His work here nearly done.
With one last night together, they knew not what would be,
But Jesus had one final word:
“Do This; Remember Me!"

Thanksgiving to the Father, an ancient feast made new.
Christ said, “This is My body, My body giv’n for you."
The holy bread was broken and shared with Jesus’ plea
That His words not be forgotten:
“Do This; Remember Me!"

He took the cup of blessing, the blood of Jesus shed
That all might know forgiveness, received when Jesus bled.
Salvation now available to all on bended knee
Who repent and follow His command:
“Do This; Remember Me!"

Yes, Christ’s command continues to all who serve His Name
To go and make disciples, that all would sing His fame.
And gathered at one table His holy church shall see
Our Master is still calling:
“Do This; Remember Me!"

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/do_we_well.php

To the Syrian camp at twilight,
Hungry, thirsty, bleeding, sore,

Came four leprous men of Israel;
Found they there abundant store—
Gold and silver, food and raiment,
“We must go the message tell,
’Tis a day of joyful tidings,
Waiting here, we do not well." 

Refrain:
’Tis the day of full salvation,
Go, the joyful message tell;
While we wait the millions perish,
And we do not well. 

Do we well, my precious brethren?
While they starve and die for bread,
We, with heaven’s richest blessings,
Are so bountifully fed;
If we tarry till the morning,
Mischief shall our souls befall—
Go and tell earth’s dying millions,
There is bread enough for all. 

India’s lost ones still are crying,
From that sin-benighted land;
Hear those wails from darkest China,
And from Egypt’s sunlit strand;
While a soul remains in darkness,
And in idleness we dwell,
Selfishly the truth enjoying,
Brethren, dear, we do not well. 

While a few have crossed the ocean,
Leaving all for Jesus’ name,
There is room for many others—
Go, the gospel news proclaim!
Those who roam in sin’s dominion
Can be rescued yet from hell,
While a moment’s left to save them;
If we wait, we do not well. 

If we labor on for Jesus,
And to every dying one
Tell the glad and joyful tidings,
Till life’s fleeting day is done,
When we stand before the judgment,
While our hearts with rapture swell,
We shall hear the Savior saying,
“Ye have done exceeding well." 



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/do_what_it_says.php

Words and Music: Kevin Schaffer © 1994 Clifty Music (BMI)


Lyrics: 

Chorus 1:
Do what it says, have faith
Look into the Word and go through with it
Do what it says, have faith
Your actions speak louder than words 

Is it good when he boasts of faith 
And does nothing
Can such faith save him?
He sees the sick and the poor and then he does nothing
Faith by itself is dead
He says be well, keep warm and fed
And does nothing
Doesn't even give them bread
His actions speak louder than his words 

Repeat Chorus 1 

She's alone after 50 years
And you do something
To comfort her distress
He's so young and now he's on his own
And you do something
You live a life that God accepts
The world tries pullin' and you hold back
Then you do nothing
Pure and faultless is what God sees
Don't forget the words you have heard 

Repeat Chorus 1 

You believe there is a God (even demons believe)
Faith without deeds is nothin'
A man's faith and actions must work hand in hand (to make his faith complete)
Justified by what he does and not by faith alone 

Chorus 2:
Do what it says, have faith (read the word)
Look into the Word and go through with it
Do what it says, have faith (read the word)
Your actions speak louder than words 

Repeat Chorus 2 

Chorus 3:
Do what it says, have faith (have faith, have faith)
Look into the Word and go through with it
Do what it says, have faith (have faith, have faith)
Your actions speak louder than words 
 



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/do_what_the_lord_does.php

Words and music: Gary Miller © 1994 Anthony K. Music (ASCAP)

Lyrics: 

Gonna do, gonna do, gonna do, gonna do, gonna do, gonna do, gonna do what the 
Lord says to do
Do it, do it, do it, do it
What the Lord does, what the Lord does
Do it, do it, do it, do it
What the Lord does, what the Lord does
Do what the Lord does, you'll do all right
Do what the Lord does, do it and you'll do all right
What the Lord does, what the Lord does 

Chorus:
I wanna do (what the Lord does)
I wanna do (what the Lord does)
I wanna do what the Lord does
And I'll do alright
I wanna do (what the Lord does)
I wanna do (what the Lord does)
I wanna do what the Lord does
And I'll do alright 

Good to be doing and 
Love to be sharing
Souls to be seeking
And work with all my might 

Repeat Chorus 

Sin to be shunning and 
Hurt to be mending
Hate to be changing
And work with all my might 

Repeat Chorus 

Do it, do it, do it, do it (to do)
What the Lord does, what the Lord does
Do it, do it, do it, do it (to do)
What the Lord does, what the Lord does
Do what the Lord does, you'll do all right
Do what the Lord does, do it and you'll do all right
What the Lord does, what the Lord does 

Repeat Chorus 

Strong and courageous
Love that's contagious
Humble and gracious
And work with all my might 

I wanna do (what the Lord does)
I wanna do (what the Lord does)
I wanna do what the Lord does
And I'll do alright
Do it, do it, do it, do it (gonna do what the Lord says to do)
What the Lord does, what the Lord does
Do it, do it, do it, do it
(Gonna do, gonna do, gonna do, gonna do, gonna do, gonna do, gonna do what the 
Lord says to do)
What the Lord does, what the Lord does
Do it, do it, do it, do it
(Gonna do, gonna do, gonna do, gonna do, gonna do, gonna do, gonna do what the 
Lord says to do)
What the Lord does, what the Lord does
Do it, do it, do it, do it (to do)
What the Lord does, what the Lord does 




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/do_what_you_gotta_do.php

Words and music: Danice Sweet

Lyrics:

Chorus:
You do what you gotta do, oh what you gotta do
You do what you gotta do, oh what you gotta do

Sometimes we have to suffer trials (You do what you gotta do)
And it often may last for awhile (You do what you gotta do)
Hold on child and He'll see you through
Sometimes it just comes down to doin' what you gotta do

Repeat Chorus

Someone may even curse your name (You do what you gotta do)
They'll come looking for someone to blame (You do what you gotta do)
Walk on child, all the way through
They can't take the truth from you, doin' what you gotta do

Repeat Chorus




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/do_ye_o_me_speak_rightiousness.php

Do ye, O men, speak righteousness
And upright judgment mete?
Nay, in your hearts is wickedness,
And in your hands deceit,
And in your hands deceit.

The wicked, from their earliest days,
In sin are gone astray,
With froward heart, in foolish pride,
From wisdom turned away,
From wisdom turned away.

The God of vengeance will destroy
The wicked from His sight;
The Lord will bring to naught their power
And scatter all their might,
And scatter all their might.

The good shall triumph and rejoice,
And this shall be confessed:
On earth the God of justice reigns,
And righteousness is blest,
And righteousness is blest.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/do_you_believe.php

Words and music: Danice Sweet

Lyrics:

Do you believe in my God? (I believe, I believe)
Do you believe that He gave His only Son? (I believe, I believe)
O Lord, do you believe that Jesus came here? (O yes, I believe, I believe)
Lord, and He died for all that men has done? (I believe, I believe)
If you believe today, then bretheren lets all say "amen (amen), say amen (amen)"

Do you believe in Jesus? (I believe, I believe)
Do you believe that He died for you and me? (I believe, I believe)
O Lord, do you believe that He died here? (O yes, I believe, I believe)
On that cruel cross of Calvary? (I believe, I believe)
Oh if you believe today, then bretheren lets all say "amen (amen), say amen 
(amen)"

Do you believe in the Bible? (I believe, I believe)
Do you believe what it has to say? (I believe, I believe)
O Lord, do you believe in what it teaches? (O yes, I believe, I believe)
That there is only, there is only one way? (I believe, I believe)
If you believe today, then bretheren lets all say "amen (amen), say amen (amen)"

I believe in Jesus (I believe, I believe)
I still believe, I believe that Jesus Christ (I believe, I believe)
Sweet Lord, I believe He gave His precious life (O yes, I believe, I believe)
When He made that supreme sacrifice (I believe, I believe)
Yes, if you believe today, then won't you with us say "amen (amen), say amen 
(amen)"

Say "amen (amen)", Lord say "amen (amen)"

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/do_you_believe_in_me.php

Words and Music: Dallas Holm © 1978-1979 Going Holm Music

Lyrics:

Narrative:
In those last days I tried so hard, once again, to show the people my Father’s 
way. My compassion for them ran so deep. "Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often I 
have longed to gather your children together as a hen gathers her chicks under 
her wings, but you were not willing." I even spoke in parables of the kingdom of 
God so that they might understand. But they would not hear. This is why I spoke 
to them in parables. Though seeing they do not see, though hearing they do not 
hear or understand. In them is fulfilled the prophesy of Isaiah, “you will be 
ever hearing but never understanding, you will be ever seeing but never 
perceiving." For this people’s heart has become calloused. They hardly hear with 
their ears, and they have closed their eyes. Otherwise they might see with their 
eyes, hear with their ears, understand with their hearts and turn, and I would 
heal them. Sometimes I wondered if anyone had ever really heard or truly seen. 
The handful of men that followed me faithfully, had they really heard, could 
they really know and believe? During the last night we spent together, I tried 
so hard to help them understand.

Chorus 1:
Do you believe in me
And in the words I say
And in Him who sent me from above
Do you believe in my love

I’ve tried so many ways to show you my love
And show you who I am
Sometimes I wonder if you’ve ever learned
Or if you understand

Chorus 2:
Do you believe in me (do you believe in me)
And in the words I say (and in the words I say)
And in Him who sent me from above (sent me from above)
Do you believe in my love (do you believe in my love)

This is my body that is broken for you
Never forget what I’ve done
This is my blood that is shed for you
This is what makes us one

Chorus 3:
Do you believe in me
And in the words I say (do you believe)
And in Him who sent me from above (in Him who sent me from above)
Do you believe in my love



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/do_you_fear_the_foe.php

Do you fear the foe will in the conflict win?
Is it dark without you—darker still within?
Clear the darkened windows, open wide the door,
Let a little sunshine in.
Refrain

Let a little sunshine in,
Let a little sunshine in;
Clear the darkened windows,
Open wide the door,
Let a little sunshine in.

Does your faith grow fainter in the cause you love?
Are your prayers unanswered by your God above?
Clear the darkened windows, open wide the door,
Let a little sunshine in.

Refrain

Would you go rejoicing in the upward way,
Knowing naught of darkness, dwelling in the day?
Clear the darkened windows, open wide the door,
Let a little sunshine in.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/do_you_hear_them_coming_brother.php

Do you hear them coming, brother,
Thronging up the steeps of light,
Clad in glorious shining garments,
Blood washed, garments pure and white?
Refrain

’Tis a glorious church without spot or wrinkle,
Washed in the blood of the Lamb;
’Tis a glorious church without spot or wrinkle,
Washed in the blood of the Lamb.

Do you hear the stirring anthems,
Filling all the earth and sky,
’Tis a grand, victorious army,
Lift its banner up on high!

Refrain

Never fear the clouds of sorrow,
Never fear the storms of sin.
We shall triumph on the morrow,
Even now our joys begin.

Refrain

Wave the banner, shout His praises,
For our victory is nigh!
We shall join our conqu’ring Savior,
We shall reign with Him on high!

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/do_you_hear_what_i_hear.php

Said the night wind to the little lamb, 
"Do you see what I see? 
Way up in the sky, little lamb, 
Do you see what I see? 
A star, a star, dancing in the night 
With a tail as big as a kite, 
With a tail as big as a kite." 

Said the little lamb to the shepherd boy, 
"Do you hear what I hear? 
Ringing through the sky, shepherd boy, 
Do you hear what I hear? 
A song, a song high above the trees 
With a voice as big as the the sea, 
With a voice as big as the the sea." 

Said the shepherd boy to the mighty king, 
"Do you know what I know? 
In your palace warm, mighty king, 
Do you know what I know? 
A Child, a Child shivers in the cold-- 
Let us bring him silver and gold, 
Let us bring him silver and gold." 

Said the king to the people everywhere, 
"Listen to what I say! 
Pray for peace, people, everywhere, 
Listen to what I say! 
The Child, the Child sleeping in the night 
He will bring us goodness and light, 
He will bring us goodness and light." 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/do_you_know_how_many_stars.php

Do you know how many stars
There are shining in the sky?
Do you know how many clouds
Every day go floating by?
God, the Lord, their number knoweth,
For each one His care He showeth,
Of the bright and boundless host,
Of the bright and boundless host.

Do you know how many birdies
In the sunshine sing each day?
Do you know how many fishes
In the sparkling water play?
God, the Lord, Who dwells in Heaven,
Name and life to each has given,
In His love they live and move,
In His love they live and move.

Do you know how many children
Go to little beds at night,
And without a care or sorrow
Wake again with morning light?
God in Heav’n each name can tell,
Know us, too, and loves us well,
He’s our best and dearest Friend,
He’s our best and dearest Friend.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/do_you_know_jesus.php

Do you know Jesus,
Our Lord, our Savior,
Jesus the Son of God?
Have you ever seen Him,
Or shared of His favor?
Jesus the Son of God.
Refrain

O sweet Wonder!
O sweet Wonder!
Jesus the Son of God;
How I adore Thee!
O how I love Thee!
Jesus the Son of God.

God gave Him, a ransom,
Our souls to recover;
Jesus the Son of God.
His blood made us worthy
His Spirit to hover;
Jesus the Son of God.

Refrain

O who would reject Him,
Despise or forsake Him,
Jesus the Son of God?
O who ever sought Him,
And He would not take Him?
Jesus the Son of God.

Refrain

If you will accept Him
And trust and believe Him,
Jesus the Son of God,
Your soul will exalt Him,
And never will leave Him;
Jesus the Son of God.

Refrain

Then some day from heaven,
On clouds of bright glory,
Jesus the Son of God
Will come for His jewels,
Most precious and holy,
Jesus the Son of God.

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/do_you_know_my_jesus.php

Words and Music: Vep B. Ellis and William F. Lakey

Lyrics:

Have you a heart that's weary
Tending a load of care?
Are you a soul that's seeking
Rest from the burden you bear?

Chorus:
Do you know (do you know) my Jesus?
Do you know (do you know) my friend?
Have you heard (have you heard) He loves you?
And that He will abide til the end (til the end)?

Who knows your disappointments?
Who hears each time you cry?
Who understands your heartaches?
Who dries the tears from your eyes?

Repeat Chorus (x2)
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/do_you_know_the_song_that_the_angels_sang.php

Do you know the song that the angels sang
On that night in the long ago,
When the heavens above with their music rang
Till it echoed in the earth below?
Refrain

All glory in the highest,
Peace on earth, goodwill to men,
Glory in the highest,
Peace, goodwill to men;
Glory in the highest,
Glory in the highest,
Peace on earth, goodwill to men.

Do you know the song that the shepherds heard
As they watched o’er their flocks by night,
When the skies bent down, and their hearts were stirred
By the voices of the angels bright?

Refrain

Do you know the story that the wise men learned
As they journeyed from the east afar,
O’er a pathway plain, for there nightly burned
In their sight a glorious guiding star?

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/do_you_know_the_song_the_angels_sang.php

Do you know the song that the angels sang
On that night in the long ago,
When the heavens above with their music rang
Till it echoed in the earth below?
Refrain

All glory in the highest,
Peace on earth, goodwill to men,
Glory in the highest,
Peace, goodwill to men;
Glory in the highest,
Glory in the highest,
Peace on earth, goodwill to men.

Do you know the song that the shepherds heard
As they watched o’er their flocks by night,
When the skies bent down, and their hearts were stirred
By the voices of the angels bright?

Refrain

Do you know the story that the wise men learned
As they journeyed from the east afar,
O’er a pathway plain, for there nightly burned
In their sight a glorious guiding star?

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/do_you_love_the_lord.php

Words and music: Keith Lancaster © 1990 Anthony K. Music (ASCAP) 

Lyrics:

Chorus:
Do you love the Lord?
Are you taking the time to be reading His Word?
Do you trust and obey each and every day?
Do you love the Lord?

It's not for your brother; it's not kids at school,
It's not for others to say.
Decide for yourself live the golden rule,
Only you can choose the way.

Repeat Chorus

It's not for your mom and it's not for your dad,
It's not for your Sunday school class
Decide for yourself to be good, never bad,
Making your decision last.

Repeat Chorus (x2)

Do you love the Lord?

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/do_you_love_the_world.php

Do you love the world, in its pomp and show?
In its course of sin will you onward go?
Is the pride of life more than heav’n above?
Will you lose your soul for the sins you love? 

Refrain:
Do you love the world? Will you selfish be,
When the Lord provides everything for thee?
Can you still refuse? Will you come and bow?
Give your heart and life to His service now? 

Do you love the world, its applause and fame?
Soon ’twill end in sorrow, remorse, and shame;
Jesus bids you come and redeem your soul
From its awful doom, ere the judgments roll. 

Do you love the world? Is it dear to thee?
Can it help thy soul in eternity?
Will you choose its way more than godly fear,
Sealing thus your doom, when the Lord is near? 

Do you love the world more than Christ who died?
How the blood flowed free from His pierced side!
When it cost His life to prepare that place,
Will you die in sin, and refuse His grace? 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/do_you_see_the_hebrew_captive_kneeling.php

Do you see the Hebrew captive kneeling,
At morning, noon and night, to pray?
In his chamber he remembers Zion,
Though in exile far away.
Refrain

Are your windows open toward Jerusalem,
Though as captives here, a “little while" we stay?
For the coming of the King in His glory
Are you watching day by day?

Refrain

Do not fear to tread the fiery furnace,
Nor shrink the lion’s den to share;
For the God of Daniel will deliver,
He will send His angel there.

Refrain

Children of the living God, take courage,
Your great deliverance sweetly sing.
Set your faces toward the hill of Zion,
Thence to hail your coming King.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/do_you_think_to_pray.php

Ere you left your room this morning,
Did you think to pray?
In the name of Christ our Savior,
Did you sue for loving favor,
As a shield today? 

Refrain:
Oh, how praying rests the weary!
Prayer will change the night to day;
So when life seems dark and dreary,
Don’t forget to pray. 

When you met with great temptation,
Did you think to pray?
By His dying love and merit,
Did you claim the Holy Spirit
As your guide and stay? 

When your heart was filled with anger,
Did you think to pray?
Did you plead for grace, my brother,
That you might forgive another
Who had crossed your way? 

When sore trials came upon you,
Did you think to pray?
When your soul was bowed in sorrow,
Balm of Gilead did you borrow
At the gates of day? 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/do_you_want_to_live_in_glory.php

Chorus:
Do you want to live in glory
Oh dear friend, forevermore
Do you want a life eternal
Somewhere on that golden shore

Many times I sat there crying
As a friend was passing on
But all those times he gave me comfort
And the strength to carry on


From this world of pain and sorrow
To that golden promised land
There I'll go now Lord tomorrow
I know God will hold my hand


As my time on earth grow shorter
I'll not fear that last long day
For a better home awaits me
And sweet Jesus leads the way


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/doctor_jesus.php

VERSE 1

You know I've got so many problems
And lately I've been feelin' kinda down
I hear Your the one I should talk to
I hear Your the best healer around

CHORUS

Doctor Jesus, will you help me?
Make me better, make me whole
Doctor Jesus Lord I need you
To mend my heart and save my soul

VERSE 2

There's so many out there who need you
Do you think you could work me in
You see I'm in the worst of conditions
But mostly I just need me a friend

TO CHORUS


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/does_jesus_care.php

Does Jesus care when my heart is pained
Too deeply for mirth or song,
As the burdens press, and the cares distress
And the way grows weary and long?
Refrain

Oh yes, He cares, I know He cares,
His heart is touched with my grief;
When the days are weary, the long nights dreary,
I know my Savior cares.

Does Jesus care when my way is dark
With a nameless dread and fear?
As the daylight fades into deep night shades,
Does He care enough to be near?

Refrain

Does Jesus care when I’ve tried and failed
To resist some temptation strong;
When for my deep grief there is no relief,
Though my tears flow all the night long?

Refrain

Does Jesus care when I’ve said “goodbye"
To the dearest on earth to me,
And my sad heart aches till it nearly breaks,
Is it aught to Him? Does He see?

Refrain







https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/does_thy_savior_pilot_thee.php

And with fury lash life’s sea;
There’s peace within my soul tonight.
For my Savior dwells with me.
Refrain

He will bring the peace and comfort,
Sailor, on a stormy sea;
Do you hope to reach the haven?
Does thy Savior pilot thee?

How sad to drift alone,
Tossed by every passing wave!
There is a Pilot, sin sick soul;
Christ alone thy bark can save.

Refrain

A voice says, “Peace, be still,"
And sweet rest comes into life;
No longer left to fight alone,
He will guide thee through the strife.

Refrain







https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/doctor_jesus.php

VERSE 1

You know I've got so many problems
And lately I've been feelin' kinda down
I hear Your the one I should talk to
I hear Your the best healer around

CHORUS

Doctor Jesus, will you help me?
Make me better, make me whole
Doctor Jesus Lord I need you
To mend my heart and save my soul

VERSE 2

There's so many out there who need you
Do you think you could work me in
You see I'm in the worst of conditions
But mostly I just need me a friend

TO CHORUS


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dont_be_talkin_bout_friends.php

Words and music: Keith Lancaster © 1989 Anthony K. Music (ASCAP) 

Lyrics: 

Of all the things to do to a friend 
You hurt them by your tongue. 
Relationships will fatally end 
Without a knife or gun. 

Waitin' till you 're back behind them, 
Then you put them down 
How could you be talkin' 'bout them 
When they're not around? 

Chorus:
Don't be talkin' 'bout friends when they're not around
Don't be cuttin' their hearts and puttin' them down.
Don't be temptin' the Lord and makin' Him frown,
Don't be talkin' 'bout your friends when they're not around. 

How all the gossip falls on our ears
It doesn't make much sense,
How we can cause the innocent tears, 
Not helping their defense. 

Listening, we all should fear it, 
Listening is wrong.
If there were no one to hear it
It could not go on. 

Repeat Chorus 

Too many friendships have been broken
By just a simple, careless word spoken. 

Repeat Chorus (x2) 

Don't be talkin' down, throwin' down, cuttin' down friends
Why not treat them more like friends (when they're not around)?
Don't be saying lots of things, overlook the hurt it brings
Don't be talkin' bout your friends (when they're not around). 






https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dont_cry.php

Words and music: Kevin Schaffer © 1995 Clifty Music (BMI)

Lyrics:

Don't cry 

Listen to the raindrops fallin'
Gently calling you to sleep
Can't you hear the raindrops fallin'
Soon you'll be in a land of dreams 

See the shadows moving on the wall (shadows on the wall)
They're only angels in disguise (angels in disguise)
There's no need to fear at all (don't fear, don't fear, don't fear, don't fear)
You're being watched by heavenly eyes (heavenly eyes) 

Chorus 1:
Don't cry (cry)
I'll always be here
Don't cry (cry)
I'll always be near
Don't cry (cry)
There's always a better day
Don't cry
Tomorrow's just a prayer away 

Do you feel my arms wrapped around you (arms around your shoulder)
I never want to let you go (never let you go)
There will be a day when I'll need to
I thank the Lord He's in control 

Repeat Chorus 1 

(If it rains all) If it rains all night, and it rains all day (if it)
(If it) It'll be okay (if it rains, it will be okay)
If it rains all day (if it rains all day), and it rains all night (if it rains 
all night)
Everything will be all right (please don't cry) 

Chorus 2:
Don't cry (cry)
I'll always be here
Don't cry (cry)
I'll always be near
Don't cry (cry)
There's always a better day
Don't cry 
It'll be okay 

Repeat Chorus 1 

Don't cry (don't cry, don't cry)
Don't cry (don't cry, don't cry)
Don't cry (listen to the raindrops)

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dont_fear_the_storm.php

Words and music: Robert C. Guy and Gary Moyers © 1995 Anthony K. Music (ASCAP)/Clifty 
Music (BMI)

Lyrics: 

Fear not my child; the storm you hear
Will pass on through the night
The beauty of tomorrow
Will always shed new light 

Dark clouds will soon just melt away 
To bring a brighter day
So don't you fear; you're not alone
God hears you when you pray 

Chorus 1:
So I close my eyes to sleep at night
As my Father gently says
"The winds and rains your soul can't harm
So trust in Me and don't fear the storm" 

I'll shelter you and keep you safe
When rain falls on your head
I'll send My guardian angels there
To stand around your bed 

I remember Daddy telling me
That rain comes now and then
But my heav'nly Father watches me
Through nights of storms and winds 

Chorus 2:
I'll stay right here (stay right here) asleep in bed (asleep in bed)
Where it's safe and warm
The winds and rains (winds and rains) my soul can't harm (soul can't harm)
I'll trust in You and not fear the storm 

Dark clouds will soon just melt away
To bring a brighter day
So don't you fear; you're not alone
God hears you when you pray 

Interlude 

Don't fear the storm 

(Don't fear, don't fear) (x4)
Don't Cry 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dont_forget_the_sabbath.php

Don’t forget the Sabbath,
The Lord our God hath blest,
Of all the week the brightest,
Of all the week the best;
It brings repose from labor,
It tells of joy divine,
Its beams of light descending,
With heav’nly beauty shine.
Refrain

Welcome, welcome, ever welcome,
Blessèd Sabbath day,
Welcome, welcome, ever welcome,
Blessèd Sabbath day.

Keep the Sabbath holy,
And worship Him today,
Who said to His disciples,
“I am the living Way";
And if we meekly follow
Our Savior here below,
He’ll give us of the fountain
Whose streams eternal flow.

Refrain

Day of sacred pleasure!
Its golden hours we’ll spend
In thankful hymns to Jesus,
The children’s dearest Friend;
O gentle, loving, Savor,
How good and kind Thou art,
How precious is Thy promise
To dwell in every heart!

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dont_hesitate.php

Words and music: Bob Allsup © 1992

Lyrics: 

If you really want to feel this way
Talk to Jesus you know everyday
You know He is a friend of mine
He's been known to even heal the blind
Just trust in Him some people say
But I know He is the only way 

Chorus:
Don't hesitate (hesitate, hesitate)
The day is today
Don't be afraid (don't be afraid)
Of a little change (just a little change)
Just have some faith (have some faith, have some faith)
Don't hesitate 

Why don't you give your heart to Jesus now
One day you may even wear a crown
You know we're looking for that one fine day
When we all may hear Him say
Welcome home my child come on in
Once you are forgiven of your sin 

Repeat Chorus 

Reach out and touch the man who died for you
Then every thing will come into view
God is alive I know you've heard it before
But if you feel Him, you know for sure
Come on and walk into the watery grave
You know immersion is the only way 

What are you waiting for? 

Repeat Chorus 

Just have some faith (have some faith, have some faith)
Don't hesitate




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dont_judge_your_neighbor.php

I've made mistakes the same as you
I have sinned as we all do
I can name them one by one
I must be judged for the things I've done. 

Chorus: 
Don't judge your neighbor, don't judge your neighbor
You're not the one to say he's wrong
Clean out your own house sweep out your own house
There'll be a great judgement day before long. 

No one's free from sin this we know
For in the Bible it tells us so
Love everybody like God loves you
And don't harm your neighbor it's wrong if you do. 

Chorus: 

When you see a brother tossed by the way
Life full of sin forgot how to pray
Never condemn him God's will obey
He must be judged on that great judgement day


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dont_let_them_take_the_bible_out_of_our_school_rooms.php

They're trying to take the Bible out of our schoolrooms
They say our children can't give thanks with prayer
But if they take our Bible out of our school rooms
Then how can this old world get anywhere
Don't let them take the Bible out of our school rooms
Don't let them close the door of your childs heart
Don't let them rob our children of salvation
If you do we're going to lose them from the start
Our leaders had a meeting up in Washington
They write that laws that keep our country free
If we cease to teach our children about Jesus
No school room could teach them what they need
Don't let them take the Bible out of our school rooms
Don't let them close the door of your childs heart
Don't let them rob our children of salvation
If you do we're going to lose them from the start
If it's right to allow liquor in most counties
On the newstand see the sinful pictures there
If it's right for moving pictures of corruption
Dear God how can we say it's wrong for prayer
Don't let them take the Bible out of our school rooms
Don't let them close the door of your childs heart
Don't let them rob our children of salvation
If you do we're going to lose them from the start

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dont_lose_the_vision.php

O have you had the vision, have you heard the cry
Of millions lost and perishing, O do not let them die;
Their souls have all been purchased at how great a cost!
Don’t lose the vision, keep your eye upon the cross.
Refrain

Don’t lose the vision, keep your eye upon the cross;
Don’t lose the vision, or the cause will suffer loss;
If you want to reach another,
Keep in touch with Christ, my brother,
Don’t lose the vision, keep your eye upon the cross.

The young men shall see visions and the old dream dreams,
The wilderness be watered, in the desert shall be streams,
The Spirit poured upon us, cleansing from all dross,
Don’t lose the vision, keep your eye upon the cross.

Refrain

Isaiah had a vision of the Lord on high
Whose train filled all the temple and he heard the seraph cry;
O Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord of hosts,
Don’t lose the vision, keep your eye upon the cross.

Refrain

The vision of the prophet showed to him his sin;
He cried out, “Woe is me! for I am still unclean within";
The fire from off the altar purged his heart from dross,
Don’t lose the vision, keep your eye upon the cross.

Refrain

The fields are white to harvest, have you heard the call?
The Spirit now is waiting, won’t you yield to Him our all?
The time is swiftly passing, O! the fearful loss,
Don’t lose the vision, keep your eye upon the cross.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dont_overlook_salvation.php

Heaven is a city, built by jewels rare
Its beauty is a splendor yet untold
If you neglect salvation you'll never enter in
You'll never ever walk those streets of gold

So don't overlook salvation, while living here in sin
Someday it may be too late to pray
Someday when you need Him, He may not let you in
How awful if He should turn you away

Sometimes we get discouraged, while we walk this weary way
But Jesus said he'd every burden bear
So take Him all your troubles, when it seems all hope is gone
Just trust Him when you go to Him in prayer

Jesus said be ready for you know not when the hour
He may come at morning night or noon
So keep your eyes upon Him and your soul filled with His power
For you know He's surely coming soon

So don't overlook salvation, while living here in sin
Someday it may be too late to pray
Someday when you need Him, He may not let you in
How awful if He should turn you away

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dont_resist_the_holy_spirit.php

Don’t resist the Holy Spirit,
Sinner, heed His loving voice;
Oh, invite Him to thy bosom,
Peace shall crown that blessed choice. 

Refrain:
Come, poor sinner, yield to Jesus,
At His throne of mercy bow;
Oh, the Spirit bids you welcome,
Come, and He will save you now. 

Don’t resist the Holy Spirit,
For He comes to save thy soul;
Taste His love so kindly given,
Humbly yield to His control. 

Don’t resist the Holy Spirit,
Do not grieve the gentle Dove;
He will witness sins forgiven,
And the bliss of perfect love. 

Don’t resist the Holy Spirit,
He has called you oft before;
This may be His final visit,
If you open not the door. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dont_wait_til_judgment_day.php

Chorus: 
Don't wait til judgement day to cast your sins away
If you do you're gonna see smoke and flame
Get on the ritghteous side then you won't be denied
When the Lord up yonder calls your name. 

They'll be moaning, they'll be groaning when the place begins to roar
They'll be kneeling, they'll be prayin' like they never prayed before
But when all the sorting's over the Lord will show His might
Some are gonna be left, some are gonna be right. 

Chorus: 

They'll be beggin', they'll be pleadin' won't you open up the door
If you'll let me in I'll promise I'll never sin no more
But the Lord knows all that happens so you better see the light
Some are gonna be left, some are gonna be right. 

Chorus: 

They'll be sweatin', they'll be frettin' with the tear drops in their eyes
They'll be callin' on the Master for a glimpse of Paradise
No one know what will become of all those who shake with fright
Some are gonna be left, some are gonna be right. 

Chorus: 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dont_wait_til_winter.php

Words: Frank Simmons and Danice Sweet

Lyrics:

(Don't wait til winter, don't wait til winter)
If you need to right a wrong, don't wait til winter (don't wait til winter)
If you need to atone, don't wait til winter (don't wait til winter)

Chorus:
The winds of winter blow so cold, no one will have time for you when you're sick 
and old
If you want Christ to save your precious soul, don't wait til winter (don't wait 
til winter)

If you need to make a change, don't wait til winter (don't wait til winter)
If you die in your sins, Lord what a shame, don't wait til winter (don't wait 
til winter)

Repeat Chorus

The winds of winter make the warmest heart turn cold
You might not even feel it should, the winds begin to blow

And if a sister has left the fold, don't wait til winter (don't wait til winter)
You must go and try to gently bring her home, oh don't wait til winter (don't 
wait til winter)

Repeat Chorus

Now if you need, need to come to Christ, don't wait til winter (don't wait til 
winter)
If you need to be baptized, don't wait til winter (don't wait til winter)

Repeat Chorus

I'm prayin' you come before winter (don't wait til winter)
You know you've gotta come before winter (don't wait til winter)
I beg you to come before winter
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dost_thou_in_a_manger_lie.php

Dost Thou in a manger lie, Who hast all created,
Stretching infant hands on high, Savior, long awaited?
If a monarch, where Thy state? Where Thy court on Thee to wait?
Royal purple where? Here no regal pomp we see;
Naught but need and penury; why thus cradled here?

“Pitying love for fallen man brought Me down thus low…
For a race deep lost in sin, came I into woe…
By this lowly birth of Mine, sinner riches shall be thine,
Matchless gifts and free; willingly this yoke I take,
And this sacrifice I make, heaping joys for thee."

Fervent praise would I to Thee evermore be raising;
For Thy wondrous love to me Thee be ever praising.
Glory, glory be forever unto that most bounteous Giver,
And that loving Lord! Better witness to Thy worth,
Purer praise than ours on earth, angels’ songs afford.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dost_thou_truly_seek_renown.php

Dost thou truly seek renown
Christ His glory sharing?
Wouldst thou win the heavenly crown
Victor’s meed declaring?
Tread the path the Savior trod,
Look upon the crown of God,
See what He is wearing.

This the King of Heaven bore
In that sore contending;
This His sacred temples wore,
Honor to it lending;
In this helm He faced the foe,
On the rood He laid him low,
Satan’s kingdom ending.

Christ upon the tree of scorn,
In salvation’s hour,
Turned to gold those pricks of thorn
By His Passion’s power;
So on sinners, who had earned
Endless death, from sin returned,
Endless blessings shower.

When in death’s embrace we lie,
Then, good Lord, be near us;
With Thy presence fortify,
And with victory cheer us;
Turn our erring hearts to Thee,
That we crowned for ay may be:
O good Jesu, hear us!



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/doubly_good_to_you.php



Words and music: Richard Mullins © 1983 Meadowgreen Music Co. (ASCAP)

Lyrics: 

If you see the moon rising gently on your fields
If the wind blows softly on your face
If the sunset lingers while cathedral bells peal
And the moon has risen to her place

Chorus:
You can thank the Father for the things that He has done
And thank Him for the things He's yet to do (if you find a love)
And if you find a love that's tender, if you find someone who's true (thank the 
Lord)
Thank the Lord (thank you Lord), He's been doubly good to you

And if you look in the mirror at the end of a hard day
And you know in your heart you have not lied
And if you gave love freely, if you 'veearned an honest wage
And if you've got Jesus by your side

Repeat Chorus (x2)

Thank the Lord, He's been doubly good to you 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/down_at_the_bottom_of_a_bell.php




Words and music: Darin McWatters, Tim Brinkman, and Tim Sovinec © 1998 Bridge 
Building Music, Inc. 

Lyrics:

Well my life’s such a disaster, nothin’ ever turns out right
I’m so stressed with all my problems, can’t get any sleep at night
Everyone I know’s against me and my parents treat me bad
Now you know my whole life story, tell me does it make you sad

Taking every situation in the worst possible way
I can make anything seem bad, I know all the words to say
I exaggerate my stories, make things seem worse than they are
Drag my feet and slump my shoulders, acting sad’s where I’m a star

Chorus:
Look at me everyone down at the bottom of a well
Don’t bother rescuing me yet, I’ve not had time to whine and yell
I could climb out if I wanted, this hole’s not really that deep
At the bottom of the well, though, ‘cause that’s where I want to be

Even when the sun is shinin’ I complain of my sunburn
Sympathy and aloe vera are the things for which I yearn
When my baby wants to snuggle I say “I wanna be alone"
Fun like that just makes me happy, there’s no time to frown and moan

If I’d cast all of my cares upon the Lord as he commands
I know I’d find peace and shelter there inside His loving hands
But I’d not get the attention negativity provides
I’ll just find myself a hole, ask all the watch and jump inside

Repeat Chorus

I need somebody to tell me everything will be alright
Feeling miserable’s hard work, won’t someone pity me tonight?

Repeat Chorus

Repeat Verse 1

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/down_at_the_cross.php

Down at the cross where my Savior died,
Down where for cleansing from sin I cried,
There to my heart was the blood applied;
Glory to His Name!
Refrain

Glory to His Name, glory to His Name:
There to my heart was the blood applied;
Glory to His Name!

I am so wondrously saved from sin,
Jesus so sweetly abides within;
There at the cross where He took me in;
Glory to His Name!

Refrain

Oh, precious fountain that saves from sin,
I am so glad I have entered in;
There Jesus saves me and keeps me clean;
Glory to His Name!

Refrain

Come to this fountain so rich and sweet,
Cast thy poor soul at the Savior’s feet;
Plunge in today, and be made complete;
Glory to His Name!

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/down_by_the_river_side.php

Gonna lay down my sword and shield:
Down by the riverside
Down by the riverside
Down by the riverside

Gonna lay down my sword and shield:
Down by the riverside
Gonna study war no more.

Chorus:
I ain’t gonna study war no more,
I ain’t gonna study war no more,
Study war no more.
I ain’t gonna study war no more,
I ain’t gonna study war no more,
Study war no more.


Gonna stick my sword in the golden sand; etc.

Gonna put on my long white robe;

Gonna put on my starry crown;

Gonna put on my golden shoes;

Gonna talk with the Prince of Peace;

Gonna shake hands around the world;

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/down_by_the_river_side.php

Gonna lay down my sword and shield:
Down by the riverside
Down by the riverside
Down by the riverside

Gonna lay down my sword and shield:
Down by the riverside
Gonna study war no more.

Chorus:
I ain’t gonna study war no more,
I ain’t gonna study war no more,
Study war no more.
I ain’t gonna study war no more,
I ain’t gonna study war no more,
Study war no more.


Gonna stick my sword in the golden sand; etc.

Gonna put on my long white robe;

Gonna put on my starry crown;

Gonna put on my golden shoes;

Gonna talk with the Prince of Peace;

Gonna shake hands around the world;

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/down_from_his_splendor_in_glory_he_came.php

Down from His splendor in glory He came,
Into a world of woe;
Took on Himself all my guilt and my shame,
Why should He love me so?
Refrain

How can I help but love Him,
When He loved me so?
How can I help but love Him,
When He loved me so?

I am unworthy to take of His grace,
Wonderful grace so free;
Yes, Jesus suffered and died in my place,
E’en for a soul like me.

Refrain

He is the fairest of thousands to me,
His love is sweet and true;
Wonderful beauty in Him I now see,
More than I ever knew.

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/down_from_the_worlds_of_radiant_light.php

Down from the worlds of radiant light
Behold the Savior come,
To ransom souls from endless night
And bring the wand’rers home.

He calls us to His dear embrace
From mis’ry and despair,
Bids us receive His wondrous grace,
And seek salvation there.

We come, Emmanuel, at Thy call,
Believe Thy glad’ning Word,
Renounce our sins, ourselves, our all,
And glory in our Lord.

Salvation to Messiah’s Name
With grateful hearts we sing,
And join our voices to proclaim
Our Saviour and our King.

Immortal praise to God belongs
For such unfathomed love;
Join, all below, in rapturous songs,
And shout, ye hosts above.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/down_in_the_garden.php

Hushed by the shadows dark and drear,
The feathered songsters rest;
All earth in slumber doth appear,
But Christ, earth’s heav’nly Guest. 

Refrain:
Down in the garden hear the mournful sound,
There in the darkness on the dewy ground,
While the watchers they were sleeping,
Was Jesus praying, weeping,
Was Jesus praying, weeping. 

With nature’s mantle, night’s dark pall,
Beneath those garden trees,
He wrestled nobly for us all,
From sin, man to release. 

Sin’s loathsome weight He bore in sweat,
That oozed in bloody flow;
Ignoble shame was His, and yet
He meekly suffered so. 

For sinful mortals, rich and poor,
He fought hell’s legions fierce;
Abased, He won the vict’ry sure,
Though pangs His soul did pierce.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/down_in_the_valley.php

Down in the valley with my Savior I would go,
Where the flowers are blooming and the sweet waters flow;
Everywhere He leads me I would follow, follow on,
Walking in His footsteps till the crown be won.
Refrain

Follow! follow! I would follow Jesus!
Anywhere, everywhere, I would follow on!
Follow! follow! I would follow Jesus!
Everywhere He leads me I would follow on!

Down in the valley with my Savior I would go,
Where the storms are sweeping and the dark waters flow;
With His hand to lead me I will never, never fear,
Danger cannot fright me if my Lord is near.

Refrain

Down in the valley, or upon the mountain steep,
Close beside my Savior would my soul ever keep;
He will lead me safely in the path that He has trod,
Up to where they gather on the hills of God.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/down_in_the_valley(alternate).php

Down in the valley ’midst lilies sweet scented,
There is the Friend Whom I love and revere.
Oh, I will follow His steps so contented
As on the breeze His sweet Name I can hear.
Refrain

O Thou, God’s precious Son,
Who gave Thy life for me,
I am so thankful, Lord, that Thou loved me.

Thee I am seeking, oh, heed my imploring;
Whither in fragrance dost Thou take repose?
Where Thou at midday Thy flock art restoring,
Shaded from heat where the clear fountain flows?

Refrain

Now I have found Thee, O Jesus, my Savior;
Let me eternally say, Thou art mine.
Hide not Thy face from the soul seeking favor;
Hast Thou not sought me and said I am Thine?

Refrain

Sweet as Thy voice have the angels ne’er spoken;
Soft as Thy smile can the light never be.
Press me so near to Thy heart in love’s token.
Oh, to be Thine, that means heaven to me.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/down_lifes_dark_vale_we_wander.php

All joy His loved ones bringing,
When Jesus comes;
All praise through heaven ringing,
When Jesus comes.
All beauty bright and vernal,
When Jesus comes;
All glory, grand, eternal,
When Jesus comes.

Oh, let my lamp be burning
When Jesus comes;
For Him my soul be yearning
When Jesus comes.

Refrain

No more heart pangs nor sadness,
When Jesus comes;
All peace and joy and gladness,
When Jesus comes.

Refrain

All doubts and fears will vanish,
When Jesus comes;
All gloom His face will banish,
When Jesus comes.

Refrain

He’ll know the way was dreary,
When Jesus comes;
He’ll know the feet grew weary,
When Jesus comes.

Refrain

He’ll know what griefs oppressed me,
When Jesus comes;
Oh, how His arms will rest me!
When Jesus comes.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/down_on_my_knees.php

Down life’s dark vale we wander,
Till Jesus comes;
We watch and wait and wonder,
Till Jesus comes.
Refrain

Performer: Susan Ashton 

I've got a witness not too stable, it wouldn't get me very far
I've got one hand on the table and one in the cookie jar
I've got sins that need eviction from a temple that's a wreck
I've got a chain of contradiction hanging around my neck
So I go down, down, I go down on my knees

I feel the bitter winds grow colder, they are dancing with my pride
I've got a chip on my shoulder bigger than a mountainside
And these claws of human nature hold me tight within their clasp
I'm not worthy of forgiveness but I just had to ask
So I go down, down, I go down on my knees

Chorus:
Feed my hunger - slake my thirst for a spiritual rebirth
Light my darkness, move in me
Make me more than what You see as I go down on my knees

When I've all but killed the fire and my soul's in desperate need
But I wallow in the mire of complacency, that's when I go down on my knees
I want to taste the fruit I'm missing and yet I feast only on the bread
My desire's alive and kicking but my drive is dead
So I go down on my knees

CHORUS

You bear the weight of condemnation cleansing with the blood of truth
So with my humble acclamation, I want to give myself to You
So I go down, I go down, down, down
I go down on my knees
I go down, I go down, I go down on my knees
I go down, I go down, down
I go down on my knees
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/down_to_the_river_to_pray.php

As I went down in the river to pray, studying about that good old way 
And who shall wear the starry crown, good Lord, show me the way 
Oh sisters let’s go down, let’s go down, come on down 
Oh sisters let’s go down, down in the river to pray


As I went down in the river to pray, studying about that good old way 
And who shall wear the robe and crown, good Lord, show me the way 
Oh brothers let’s go down, let’s go down, come on down 
Come on brothers let’s go down, down in the river to pray


As I went down in the river to pray, studying about that good old way 
And who shall wear the starry crown, good Lord, show me the way 
Oh fathers let’s go down, let’s go down, come on down 
Oh fathers let’s go down, down in the river to pray


As I went down in the river to pray, studying about that good old way 
And who shall wear the robe and crown, good Lord, show me the way 
Oh mothers let’s go down, come on down, don’t you wanna go down 
Come on mothers let’s go down, down in the river to pray


Down in the river to pray, studying about that good old way 
And who shall wear the starry crown, good Lord, show me the way 
Oh sinners let’s go down, let’s go down, come on down 
Oh sinners let’s go down, down in the river to pray


As I went down in the river to pray, studying about that good old way 
And who shall wear the robe and crown, good Lord, show me the way


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/down_to_the_sacred_wave.php

Down to the sacred wave,
The Lord of life was led;
And He Who came our souls to save
In Jordan bowed His head.

He taught the solemn way;
He fixed the holy rite;
He bade His ransomed ones obey,
And keep the path of light.

Blest Savior, we will tread
In Thy appointed way;
Let glory o’er these scenes be shed
And smile on us today.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dragon.php

Verse 1:

A vile, enormous dragon
with heads and horns and crowns
And a tail that swept the stars from heaven
And cruelly cast them down
He lurked before the woman about to bear her Son
The One who'll rule the nations with a rod of iron

Chorus:

Now has come our salvation
The power and the kingdom of God
For the dragon is defeated
By the Word and the blood of the Lamb

Verse 2:

Behold, a war in heaven
reflected here on earth
And Michael and his angels
fought for all their worth
That wicked ancient serpent who leads the world astray
The accuser of the brethren was beaten from the fray

Chorus:

Now has come our salvation
The power and the kingdom of God
For the dragon is defeated
By the Word and the blood of the Lamb
By the Word and the blood of the Lamb

Verse 3:

Rejoice then, oh ye heavens
But woe to the earth and the sea
For he is filled, filled with fury
He knows his time is brief
'cause he knows his time is brief 

Chorus:

Now has come our salvation
The power and the kingdom of God
For the dragon is defeated
By the Word and the blood of the Lamb
By the Word and the blood of the Lamb

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/draw_me_a_map_of_gods_highway.php

LORD [G] DRAW ME A MAP OF GOD’S [D] HIGHWAY
IT’ THE [A7] ONLY ROAD THAT LEADS [D] HOME
NO [G] ONE CAN TRAVEL THERE [D] FOR ME
PLEASE JESUS DON’T [A7] LEAVE ME [D] ALONE

MANY [G] FRIENDS I’VE KNOWN HAVE CROSSED [D] OVER
AND [A7] CAME UPON NO DETOUR [D] SIGNS
THEY’RE [G] WAITIN’ FOR THE FINAL [D] DISPATCHER
THIS DRIVER WILL [A7] BE THERE ON [D] TIME

LORD [G] DRAW ME A MAP OF GOD’S [D] HIGHWAY
IT’ THE [A7] ONLY ROAD THAT LEADS [D] HOME
NO [G] ONE CAN TRAVEL THERE [D] FOR ME
PLEASE JESUS DON’T [A7] LEAVE ME [D] ALONE

NO [G] RADAR OR SPEED TRAPS TO WATCH [D] FOR
AND [A7]THERE’LL BE NO ICE ON THE [D] ROAD
THERE’S [G] ONLY ONE HIGHWAY [D] PATROLMAN
HE’LL HELP ME [A7] DELIVER MY [D] LOAD

LORD [G] DRAW ME A MAP OF GOD’S [D] HIGHWAY
IT’ THE [A7] ONLY ROAD THAT LEADS [D] HOME
NO [G] ONE CAN TRAVEL THERE [D] FOR ME
PLEASE JESUS DON’T [A7] LEAVE ME [D] ALONE

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/draw_me_close.php

Words and music by Kelly Carpenter


Draw me close to You Never let me go

I lay it all down again

To hear You say that I'm Your friend

You are my desire No one else will do

Cause no one else can take Your place

To feel the warmth of Your embrace

Help me find the way Bring me back to You


You're all I want You're all I ever needed

You're all I want

Help me know You are near
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/draw_me_close_to_thee.php

I would be nearer, my Savior,
Where I can hear Thy voice
Falling in tenderest whispers,
Making my heart rejoice. 

Refrain:
Draw me close to Thee,
Draw me close to Thee;
Keep me, dear Savior, so near Thy side,
Draw me close to Thee. 

I would be kept in Thy presence,
Free from the strife of tongues;
There shall the humble adore Thee,
Raising their grateful songs. 

Keep me, O Lord, in Thy shadow,
When the dark tempests low’r;
Safely to rest on Thy bosom,
Keep me forevermore. 

Swiftly the shadows are deep’ning,
Light of my life, be near;
Strengthen the trust I am keeping,
Fill me with hope and cheer. 
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/draw_me_close_to_you.php

Draw me close to you
Never let me go
I lay it all down again
To hear you say that I'm your friend

You are my desire
No one else will do
Cause nothing else could take your place
To feel the warmth of your embrace
Help me find the way, bring me back to you

(chorus)
You're all I want
You're all I've ever needed
You're all I want
Help me know you are near

©1994, Mercy / Vineyard Publishing
Words and Music by Kelly Carpenter
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/draw_me_closer_lord_to_thee.php

Draw me closer, Lord, to Thee,
Fold me in Thy love’s embrace,
And unto my soul reveal
All the riches of Thy grace.
Refrain

Draw me closer, closer, closer,
Closer, Lord, to Thee;
Ever purer, purer, purer
Then my soul shall be.

Draw me closer, Lord, to Thee;
In Thy arms Thy child enfold,
And this earthly heart of mine
Into Thine own image mold.

Refrain

Draw me closer, Lord, to Thee,
In communion rich and sweet,
Till my soul shall be refined,
And in Thee be made complete.

Refrain

Draw me closer, Lord, to Thee,
For my longing soul aspires
To discover in Thyself
All it yearns for and desires.

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/draw_me_into_your_presence.php

Verse 1
Draw me into Your presence
Draw me into Your presence
Draw me into Your presence;
I want to know You. 

Verse 2
For there's life in Your presence
There is life in Your presence
There is life in Your presence;
I want to know You. 

(Chorus)
Where else could I go?
Where else could I hide?
For only in Your presence, Lord,
Can I find peace of mind.

©1991 Maranatha Praise, Inc
Words and Music by Teresa Muller
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/draw_me_nearer.php

I am Thine, O Lord, I have heard Thy voice,
And it told Thy love to me;
But I long to rise in the arms of faith
And be closer drawn to Thee.
Refrain

Draw me nearer, nearer blessèd Lord,
To the cross where Thou hast died.
Draw me nearer, nearer, nearer blessèd Lord,
To Thy precious, bleeding side.

Consecrate me now to Thy service, Lord,
By the power of grace divine;
Let my soul look up with a steadfast hope,
And my will be lost in Thine.

Refrain

O the pure delight of a single hour
That before Thy throne I spend,
When I kneel in prayer, and with Thee, my God
I commune as friend with friend!

Refrain

There are depths of love that I cannot know
Till I cross the narrow sea;
There are heights of joy that I may not reach
Till I rest in peace with Thee.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/draw_nigh_and_take_the_body_of_the_lord.php

Draw nigh and take the body of the Lord;
And drink the holy blood for you outpoured.
Saved by that body and that holy blood,
With souls refreshed, we render thanks to God.

Salvation’s Giver, Christ, the only Son,
By His dear cross and blood the victory won.
Offered was He for greatest and for least,
Himself the Victim, and Himself the Priest.

Victims were offered by the law of old,
Which in a type this heavenly mystery told.
He, Ransomer from death, and Light from shade,
Now gives His holy grace His saints to aid.

Approach ye then with faithful hearts sincere,
And take the safeguard of salvation here.
He, that His saints in this world rules and shields,
To all believers life eternal yields.

With heavenly bread makes them that hunger whole,
Gives living waters to the thirsting soul,
Alpha and Omega, to Whom shall bow
All nations at the doom, is with us now.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/draw_nigh_to_thy_jerusalem.php

Draw nigh to Thy Jerusalem, O Lord,
Thy faithful people cry with one accord;
Ride on in triumph; Lord, behold we lay
Our passions, lusts, and proud wills in Thy way!

Thy road is ready; and Thy paths made straight,
With longing expectation seem to wait
The consecration of Thy beauteous feet,
And silently Thy promised advent greet!

Hosanna! welcome to our hearts! for here
Thou hast a temple, too, as Zion dear;
O enter in, dear Lord, unbar the door;
And in that temple dwell forevermore.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/draw_thou_my_soul_o_christ.php

Draw Thou my soul, O Christ, closer to Thine;
Breathe into every wish Thy will divine;
Raised my low self above, won by Thy deathless love,
Ever, O Christ, through mine let Thy life shine.

Lead forth my soul, O Christ, one with Thine own,
Joyful to follow Thee through paths unknown;
In Thee my strength renew; give me Thy work to do;
Through me Thy truth be shown, Thy love made known.

Not for myself alone may my prayer be;
Lift Thou Thy world, O Christ, closer to Thee;
Cleanse it from guilt and wrong; teach it salvation’s song
Till earth, as heaven, fulfills God’s holy will.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/drawn_to_the_cross.php

Drawn to the cross, which Thou has blest
With healing gifts for souls distressed,
To find in Thee my life, my rest,
Christ Crucified, I come.

Thou knowest all my griefs and fears,
Thy grace abused, my misspent years;
Yet now to Thee with contrite tears,
Christ Crucified, I come.

Wash me and take away each stain;
Let nothing of my sin remain.
For cleansing, tho’ it be thro’ pain,
Christ Crucified, I come.

And then for work to do for Thee,
Which shall so sweet a service be
That angels well might envy me,
Christ Crucified, I come.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/drawn_to_the_cross.php

Drawn to the cross, which Thou has blest
With healing gifts for souls distressed,
To find in Thee my life, my rest,
Christ Crucified, I come.

Thou knowest all my griefs and fears,
Thy grace abused, my misspent years;
Yet now to Thee with contrite tears,
Christ Crucified, I come.

Wash me and take away each stain;
Let nothing of my sin remain.
For cleansing, tho’ it be thro’ pain,
Christ Crucified, I come.

And then for work to do for Thee,
Which shall so sweet a service be
That angels well might envy me,
Christ Crucified, I come.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dread_jehovah_god_of_nations.php

Dread Jehovah, God of nations,
From Thy temple in the skies,
Hear Thy people’s supplications,
Now for their deliverance rise.

Lo, with deep contritions turning,
Humbly at Thy feet we bend;
Hear us, fasting, praying, mourning;
Hear us, spare us, and defend.

Though our sins, our hearts confounding,
Long and loud for vengeance call,
Thou hast mercy more abounding,
Jesus’ blood can cleanse from all.

Let that love veil our transgressions,
Let that blood our guilt efface:
Save Thy people from oppression,
Save from spoil Thy holy place.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/drifting_away_from_jesus.php

Drifting away from Jesus,
Far from His gentle fold,
Wrecked on the waves of sorrow,
Out in the night so cold.

Refrain 1-3:
Oh, am I lost forever?
Lost amid fiendish din?
Oh, can there be no lifeboat
On the dark ocean of sin? 

Drifting away from Jesus,
Day after day I glide,
Swiftly the billows bear me
Over the surging tide. 

Drifting away from Jesus,
Helpless, and tossed with care;
Soon I shall land forever
Somewhere, I know not where. 

Drifting away from Jesus,
Far from His courts of love,
Oh, do you see! A lifeboat
Sails from the ports above!

Refrain 4:
Over the bounding billows,
Jesus, my Savior, sends
Help to my storm-tossed spirit;
Praise to the Friend of friends! 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/drifting_too_far_from_the_shore.php

Out on the perilous deep
Where danger silently creeps
And storm so violently sweeping
You're drifting too far from the shore


Drifting too far from the shore
You're drifting too far from the shore
Come to Jesus today let him show you the way
You're drifting too far from the shore


Today the tempest rose high
And clouds o'ershadow the sky
Sure death is hovering nigh
You're drifting too far from the shore


Drifting too far from the shore
You're drifting too far from the shore
Come to Jesus today let him show you the way
You're drifting too far from the shore


Why meet a terrible fate
Mercies abundantly wait
Turn back before its too late
You're drifting too far from the shore


Drifting too far from the shore
You're drifting too far from the shore
Come to Jesus today let him show you the way
You're drifting too far from the shore


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/drop_in_the_bucket.php

Words and Music: Gary Moyers © 1992 Anthony K. Music (ASCAP)

Lyrics: 

Drop drop drop drop, Drop in the Bucket (x8) 

Hearts beatin' a mile a minute but it's not from exercise
Livin' in a pressure cooker, a calm demeanor's no disguise
Got your nose in your checkbook, your measurement of earthly wealth
Why you worrying about tomorrow? Let tomorrow worry 'bout itself (don't you, 
don't you worry) 

It's just a drop. Oh, it's just a drop in the bucket 

I see you working on a treadmill, running, staying in the same place
Not sure what you're running for, have you thought that maybe you're in the 
wrong race?
Running late, prime lending rate. Don't you think enough is enough? (that's 
enough)
Life is much too precious. Don't waste your time sweatin' the small stuff (drop, 
just a drop, just a drop) 

It's just a drop in the bucket (it's just a drop in the bucket), can't you see 
the forest for the trees
Just a drop in the bucket (it's just a drop in the bucket) when you compare 
eternity 

Knew a man named Johnny, trying hard to break a bent bow
He knows just where He's going, keeping all his ducks in a row
He says he couldn't be happier, but what about the price he paid?
Last time I saw Johnny he looked a bit old for his age 

(Drop drop drop drop, Drop in the Bucket (x8) (in background))
(It's just a drop in the bucket) Can't see the forest for the trees
(It's just a drop in the bucket) The view is much better on bended knee
(It's just a drop in the bucket) Life is much more than what you see
(It's just a drop in the bucket) When you compare eternity 

Bridge:
Seek first His kingdom and His righteousness
And all these things you need He'll give to you
His yoke is easy and His burden is light
So let it go 'cause He knows what to do 

If your life is looking stretched out your glasses probably need a new lens
The center gets a little hot when you try to burn the candle at both ends
So why you running up a stress test? It's either black or it's white
Who of you by worrying can add a single hour to his life? 

It's just a drop in the bucket (Drop drop drop drop, Drop in the Bucket) (Drop 
drop drop drop, Drop in the Bucket)
It's just a drop in the bucket (Drop drop drop drop, Drop in the Bucket) (Drop 
drop drop drop, Drop in the Bucket)
It's just a drop in the bucket (Drop drop drop drop, Drop in the Bucket) (Drop 
drop drop drop, Drop in the Bucket)
It's just a drop in the bucket (Drop drop drop drop, Drop in the Bucket) (Drop 
drop drop drop, Drop in the Bucket) 

It's just a drop in the bucket (Drop drop drop drop, Drop in the Bucket) (Drop 
drop drop drop, Drop in the Bucket)
Just a little bitty drop, just a little, just a little bitty drop
It's just a drop in the bucket (Drop drop drop drop, Drop in the Bucket) (Drop 
drop drop drop, Drop in the Bucket)
Just a little drop, drip, drop, drip, drop, drip, just a little bitty drop
It's just a drop in the bucket (Drop drop drop drop, Drop in the Bucket) (Drop 
drop drop drop, Drop in the Bucket)
Only a small drop in the bucket
It's just a drop in the bucket (Drop drop drop drop, Drop in the Bucket) (Drop 
drop drop drop, Drop in the Bucket) 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/drop_drop_slow_tears.php

Drop, drop, slow tears,
And bathe those beauteous feet,
Which brought from Heav’n
The news and Prince of Peace.

Cease not, wet tears,
His mercies to entreat;
To cry for vengeance:
Sin doth never cease.

In your deep floods
Drown all my faults and fears;
Nor let His eye see
Sin, but through my tears.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dusky_hands.php

Dusky hands are reaching for the bread of life
Far across the rolling sea;
Shall they perish in their misery and strife,
Shall they always hungry be?
Refrain

Send the Gospel tidings over land and sea,
Let the hungry souls be satisfied,
Till the pow’r of Jesus sets the captives free,
O lead them to the Master’s side.

Dusky hands are bound in chains of want and woe
In the far off heathen lands;
Shall we not in haste unto their borders go,
Set them free, as God commands?

Refrain

We cannot be idle any longer now,
While the souls in darkness die;
Gather them as jewels for the Savior’s brow,
While the days are passing by.

Refrain

Dusky faces look to us for hope and peace,
Shall they look to us in vain?
Jesus can redeem them, cause their sighs to cease,
Rend their chains of sin in twain.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dust_in_the_wind.php

Words and music: Kerry Livgren © 1977 Kirshner CBS Music Publishing (BMI)

Lyrics:

Oh oh oh oh
Hey yeah yeah
All we are is dust in the wind
Oh oh oh 

I close my eyes, only for a moment and the moment’s gone 
All my dreams (all my dreams)
Pass before my eyes (pass before my eyes)
A curiosity (that we are)

Chorus 1:
Dust in the wind, all they are is dust in the wind (all we are is dust)

Repeat Chorus 1

It’s the same old song (same old song)
Just a drop of water in an endless sea (drip, drop, same old song)
All we do (all we do) crumbles to the ground, though we refuse to see (crumbles 
down)

Chorus 2:
That we are dust…dust in the wind (dust in the wind)
All we are is dust in the wind (all we are is dust)
All we are (dust in the wind) dust in the wind (all we are is dust, dust in the 
wind)

Rap:
Need to wake up
Surprise, the lies, deceive my eyes
And even now another baby in a barren land cries,
Are we too thick to realize?
That nobody ever knows when you could vaporize
Still we sit and fantasize
The TV and the radio demoralize
We need to look up to the skies 
Don’t allow the very hearts of man to crystallize (all we are is dust)
Turn off that big screen TV
Stop trying to take it easy 
Get off your couch, open up your mouth (oh my Lord)
And spread the word universally

So don’t hang on (don’t you hang on)
Nothing lasts forever, not the earth or sky (nothin’ lasts forever)
It’s all gonna slip away (slips away)
And not even your money (your money) another minute buy (time keeps on tick tock 
tickin’)

Chorus 3:
Dust in the wind (all we are is dust)
All they are is dust (all we are is dust)
Dust in the wind, ohhhhhhh (all we are is dust)

Dust in the wind
We need to end our fussing and fighting
To take some time for reuniting
All we are is dust 
All we are is dust, dust in the wind



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dust_on_mothers_bible.php

Chorus
There's dust on mother's Bible
Its cover's worn with age
And tho it's old and wrinkled
Mama's there on every page


The night the angels called her
Mama called me to her side
And handed me her Bible
Said "Son, let God be your guide."


Chorus
I picked up mother's old Bible
To my heart I pressed it tight
And I heard her softly whisper
"Son, I'll meet you on the other side."


I kissed my mother's old Bible
And I wiped away the dust.
Oh you never know until she's gone
How you'll miss your mother's love


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dust_on_the_bible.php

CHORUS
[G] Dust on the Bible, dust on the holy word
The words of all the prophets and the [A7] sayings of our [D7] Lord ...
Of [G] all the other books you'll find, there's none salvation holds
Get that dust off the Bible and re-[D7] deem your poor [G] soul. 

[G] I went into a home one day to see some friends of mine
Of all the books and magazines, not a [A7] Bible could I [D7] find ...
I [G] asked them for the Bible; when they brought it, what a shame
For the dust was covered o'er it, not a finger-[D7]print was [G] plain.

CHORUS

You can read your magazines, read of love and tragic things 
And not one verse of scripture, not one verse do you know ...
When it is the very truth and its contents good for you
Dust on the Bible will doom your soul.

CHORUS

EXTRA VERSE:
Oh, if you have a friend you'd like to help along life's way
Just tell him that the Good Book shows a mortal how to pray ...
The best advice to give him that will make his burden light
Is to dust the family Bible, trade the wrong way for the right.




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dust_to_dust_the_mortal_dies.php

Dust to dust, the mortal dies,
Both the foolish and the wise;
None forever can remain,
Each must leave his hoarded gain.
Yet within their heart they say
That their houses are for aye,
That their dwelling places grand
Shall for generations stand.

To their lands they give their name
In the hope of lasting fame,
But man’s honor quickly flies,
Like the lowly beast he dies.
Though such folly mark their way,
Men approve of what they say;
Death their shepherd, they the sheep,
He within his fold will keep.

O’er them soon shall rule the just,
All their beauty turn to dust;
God my waiting soul shall save,
He will raise me from the grave.
Let no fear disturb your peace
Though one’s house and wealth increase;
Death shall end his fleeting day,
He shall carry naught away.

Though in life he wealth attained,
Though the praise of men he gained,
He shall join those gone before,
Where the light shall shine no more.
Crowned with honor though he be,
Highly gifted, strong and free,
If he be not truly wise,
Man is like the beast that dies.





https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dwell.php

Dwell in the midst of us
Come and dwell in this place
Dwell in the midst of us
Come and have your way

Dwell in the midst of us
Wipe all the tears from our faces
Dwell in the midst of us
You can have your way

Not our will, but yours be done
Come and change us
Not our will, but yours be done
Come sustain us

© 2003 Mercy/Vineyard Publishing
CCLI #1596342



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dwelling_in_beulah_land.php

Far away the noise of strife upon my ear is falling.
Then I know the sins of earth beset on every hand.
Doubt and fear and things of earth in vain to me are calling.
None of these shall move me from Beulah Land.
Refrain

I’m living on the mountain, underneath a cloudless sky.
I’m drinking at the fountain that never shall run dry.
O yes! I’m feasting on the manna from a bountiful supply,
For I am dwelling in Beulah Land.

Far below the storm of doubt upon the world is beating.
Sons of men in battle long the enemy withstand.
Safe am I within the castle of God’s Word retreating.
Nothing then can reach me—’tis Beulah Land.

Refrain

Let the stormy breezes blow, their cry cannot alarm me;
I am safely sheltered here, protected by God’s hand.
Here the sun is always shining, here there’s naught can harm me.
I am safe forever in Beulah Land.

Refrain

Viewing here the works of God, I sink in contemplation.
Hearing now His blessèd voice, I see the way He planned.
Dwelling in the Spirit here I learn of full salvation.
Gladly I will tarry in Beulah Land.

Refrain




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dwelling_in_the_land.php

Long lone years I lived in sin,
Wretched slave I was within;
Goshen was my dwelling place,
Dark and deep was my disgrace.
But now I’m 

Refrain:
Dwelling in the land,
Fed from Father’s hand,
Trusting, simply trusting every day;
Living in the light,
Blest with beauty bright,
Walking with my Savior all the way. 

I will sing unto the Lord:
By the power of His word
Pharoah’s hosts are in the sea,
Parted by His pow’r for me.
And now I’m 

Wand’ring through the wilderness,
Oft I stumbled in distress;
Yet by cloud and fiery flame,
Led o’er shimm’ring sands I came.
And now I’m 

I to Jordan’s banks was brought,
Saw the shore I longing sought:
God in answer to my plea
Second parting made for me.
So now I’m 

Jericho and giants fell,
Death to all that would rebel;
In this land I’ll ever dwell,
And my God’s great goodness tell.
Praise God, I’m 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dwelling_places.php

VERSE 1:
Lovely are Your dwelling pla - ces.
Thirsty, I come after You.
Jesus, my joy, my reward,
Your love's restoring my soul.
Now I'm Yours, and You are mine.
And from my heart a song will rise.

CHORUS:
I love You, I love You, I love You.
I love You, I love You, I love You.
I love You, I love You, I love You.
And my heart will follow wholly after You.

VERSE 2:
Jesus, there is none beside You
Righteous, ruler of the earth,
Nations will come and bow down.
Name over all names, I sing You prai - ses,
And all that I can say to You is



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/dying_with_jesus.php

Dying with Jesus, by death reckoned mine;
Living with Jesus, a new life divine;
Looking to Jesus till glory doth shine,
Moment by moment, O Lord, I am Thine.
Refrain

Moment by moment I’m kept in His love;
Moment by moment I’ve life from above;
Looking to Jesus till glory doth shine;
Moment by moment, O Lord, I am Thine.

Never a trial that He is not there,
Never a burden that He doth not bear,
Never a sorrow that He doth not share,
Moment by moment, I’m under His care.

Refrain

Never a heartache, and never a groan,
Never a teardrop and never a moan;
Never a danger but there on the throne,
Moment by moment He thinks of His own.

Refrain

Never a weakness that He doth not feel,
Never a sickness that He cannot heal;
Moment by moment, in woe or in weal,
Jesus my Savior, abides with me still.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/the_dawn_is_sprinkling_in_the_east.php

The dawn is sprinkling in the east
Its golden shower, as day flows in;
Fast mount the pointed shafts of light:
Farewell to darkness and to sin!

Away, ye midnight phantoms all!
Away, despondence and despair!
Whatever guilt the night has brought
Now let it vanish into air.

So, Lord, when that last morning breaks,
Looking to which we sigh and pray,
O may it to Thy minstrels prove
The dawning of a better day.

To God the Father glory be,
And to His sole begotten Son;
Glory, O Holy Ghost, to Thee
While everlasting ages run.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/the_dawn_of_gods_dear_sabbath.php

The dawn of God’s dear Sabbath
Breaks o’er the earth again,
As some sweet summer morning
After a night of pain;
It comes as cooling showers
To some exhausted land,
As shade of clustered palm trees
’Mid weary wastes of sand.

Lord, we would bring for offering
Though marred with earthly soil,
Our week of earnest labor,
Of useful daily toil;
Fair fruits of self denial,
Of strong, deep love to Thee,
Fostered by Thine own Spirit
In our humility.

And, we would bring our burden
Of sinful thought and deed,
In Thy pure presence kneeling,
From bondage to be freed;
Our heart’s most bitter sorrow
For all Thy work undone;
So many talents wasted!
So few bright laurels won!

And with that sorrow mingling,
A steadfast faith, and sure,
And love so deep and fervent,
That tries to make it pure;
In His dear presence finding
The pardon that we need;
And then the peace so lasting,
Celestial peace indeed!

So be it, Lord, forever;
O may we evermore
In Jesus’ holy presence
His blessèd Name adore,
Upon His peaceful Sabbath,
Within His temple walls—
Type of the stainless worship
In Zion’s golden halls.




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/the_day_draws_on_with_golden_light.php

The day draws on with golden light,
Glad songs go echoing through the height,
The broad earth lifts an answering cheer,
The deep makes moan with wailing fear.

For lo, He comes, the mighty King,
To take from death his power and sting,
To trample down his gloomy reign
And break the weary prisoner’s chain.

Enclosed He lay in rocky cell,
With guard of armèd sentinel;
But thence returning, strong and free,
He comes with pomp of jubilee.

The sad Apostles mourn Him slain,
Nor hope to see their Lord again;
Their Lord, Whom rebel thralls defy,
Arraign, accuse, and doom to die.

But now they put their grief away,
The pains of hell are loosed today;
For by the grave, with flashing eyes,
“Your Lord is risen," the angel cries.

Maker of all, to Thee we pray,
Fulfill in us Thy joy today;
When death assails, grant, Lord, that we
May share Thy Paschal victory.

To Thee Who, dead, again, dost live,
All glory, Lord, Thy people give;
All glory, as is ever meet,
To Father and to Paraclete.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/the_day_is_approching_fast.php

The day is fast approaching when the Savior shall appear,
And every eye His glory shall behold;
The tokens of His coming fill the loyal heart with cheer
Though strife abounds and love is waxing cold.
Refrain

We’ll see Him as He is,
And the brightness of His glory we shall share;
We’ll see Him as He is,
And the likeness of His image we shall bear.

In all His Father’s glory, clothed in majesty unveiled,
With myriads of the shining angel band,
The King descends triumphant in Whose might we have prevailed,
And all the ransomed rise at His command.

Refrain

Oh, may we all as sons of light be watching unto prayer,
For surely our redemption draweth nigh;
With holy zeal and patient faith, let every soul prepare
To join the advent chorus in the sky.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/the_day_is_gently_sinking_to_a_close.php

The day is gently sinking to a close,
Fainter and yet more faint the sunlight glows:
O Brightness of Thy Father’s glory,
Thou eternal Light of light, be with us now:
Where Thou art present darkness cannot be;
Midnight is glorious noon, O Lord, with Thee.

Our changeful lives are ebbing to an end;
Onward to darkness and to death we tend;
O Conqueror of the grave, be Thou our Guide;
Be Thou our Light in death’s dark eventide;
Then in our mortal hour will be no gloom,
No sting in death, no terror in the tomb.

Thou, Who in darkness walking didst appear
Upon the waves, and Thy disciples cheer,
Come, Lord, in lonesome days, when storms assail,
And earthly hopes and human succors fail;
When all is dark, may we behold Thee nigh,
And hear Thy voice, “Fear not, for it is I."

The weary world is moldering to decay,
Its glories wane, its pageants fade away:
In that last sunset, when the stars shall fall,
May we arise, awakened by Thy call,
With Thee, O Lord, forever to abide,
In that blest day which has no eventide.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/the_day_is_past_and_gone.php

The day is past and gone,
The evening shades appear;
O may we all remember well
The night of death draws near.

We lay our garments by,
Upon our beds to rest;
So death shall soon disrobe us all
Of what is here possessed.

Lord, keep us safe this night,
Secure from all our fears;
May angels guard us while we sleep,
Till morning light appears.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/the_day_is_past_and_over.php

The day is past and over;
All thanks, O Lord, to Thee!
We pray Thee that offenseless
The hours of dark may be.
O Jesus, keep us in Thy sight,
And guard us through the coming night.

The joys of day are over;
We lift our hearts to Thee,
And call on Thee that sinless
The hours of dark may be.
O Jesus, make their darkness light,
And guard us through the coming night.

Lord, that in death I sleep not,
And lest my foe should say,
“I have prevailed against him,"
Lighten mine eyes, I pray:
O Jesus, keep me in Thy sight,
And guard me through the coming night.

The toils of day are over;
We raise our hymn to Thee,
And ask that free from peril
The hours of dark may be.
O Jesus, keep us in Thy sight,
And guard us through the coming night.

Be Thou our souls’ Preserver,
O God, for Thou dost know
How many are the perils
Through which we have to go.
Lord Jesus Christ, O hear our call
And guard and save us from them all.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/the_day_is_slowly_wending.php

The day is slowly wending

Toward its silent ending,
But mid the light declining
The evening star is shining:
Refrain

O Father, while we sleep,
Thy children keep!

Beneath Thy mighty caring
The birds and beasts are sharing,
The love that sends the showers,
The hand that gives the flowers:

Refrain

Though long our day of testing,
Now comes the hour of resting,
May weariness and sadness
Be lulled to peace and gladness:

Refrain

The Savior’s cross is winning
Forgiveness for the sinning,
And while we kneel confessing,
We humbly wait Thy blessing:

Refrain

All evil thoughts expelling,
Now make in us Thy dwelling,
O Spirit, pure and holy,
Possess these hearts so lowly:

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/the_day_is_surely_drawing_near.php

The day is surely drawing near,
When God’s Son, the Anointed,
Shall with great majesty appear,
As Judge of all appointed.
All mirth and laughter then shall cease
When flames on flames will still increase,
As Scripture truly teacheth.

A trumpet loud shall then resound,
And all the earth be shaken;
Then all who in their graves are found
Shall from their sleep awaken.
But all that live shall in that hour,
By the Almighty’s boundless power
Be changed at His commanding.

A book is opened then to all,
A record truly telling
What each hath done, both great and small,
When he on earth was dwelling;
And every heart be clearly seen,
And all be known as they have been,
In thoughts and words and actions.

Then woe to those who scorned the Lord,
And sought but carnal pleasures,
Who here despised His precious Word,
And loved their earthly treasures!
With shame and trembling they will stand,
And at the Judge’s stern command
To Satan be delivered.

O Jesus, Who my debt didst pay
And for my sin wast smitten
Within the Book of Life, oh, may
My name be also written!
I will not doubt; I trust in Thee,
From Satan Thou hast made me free
And from all condemnation.

Therefore, my Intercessor be,
And for Thy blood and merit
Declare my name from judgment free,
With all who life inherit;
That I may see Thee face to face
With all thy saints in that blest place
Which Thou for us hast purchased.

O Jesus Christ, do not delay,
O hasten our salvation!
We often tremble on our way
In fear and tribulation.
Then hear us when we cry to Thee;
Come, mighty Judge, and make us free
From every evil.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/the_day_of_all_days.php

Time with its tempests is passing away,
Some day, and soon it may be,
Jesus will come, oh, that glorious day!
Coming in glory for me.
Refrain

The day of all days is coming at last,
The day of all days when sorrows are past,
The day of all days when I thro’ His grace
Shall see with delight His wonderful face.

Oh, what a wonderful joy to be there,
Praising the Lamb that was slain;
Rising to met Him, caught up in the air!
Oh, He is coming again.

Refrain

That is the wonderful day of all days,
That day when time shall be o’er;
Tongues of all nations will sing of His praise
On fair eternity’s shore.

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/the_day_of_resurection.php

The day of resurrection! Earth, tell it out abroad;
The Passover of gladness, the Passover of God.
From death to life eternal, from earth unto the sky,
Our Christ hath brought us over, with hymns of victory.

Our hearts be pure from evil, that we may see aright
The Lord in rays eternal of resurrection light;
And listening to His accents, may hear, so calm and plain,
His own “All hail!" and, hearing, may raise the victor strain.

Now let the heavens be joyful! Let earth the song begin!
Let the round world keep triumph, and all that is therein!
Let all things seen and unseen their notes in gladness blend,
For Christ the Lord hath risen, our joy that hath no end.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/the_day_of_the_lord_is_at_hand.php

The day of the Lord is at hand, at hand;
Its storms roll up the sky;
The nations sleep starving on heaps of gold;
All dreamers toss and sigh;
The night is darkest before the morn;
When the pain is sorest the child is born,
And the day of the Lord is at hand, at hand,
The day of the Lord is at hand.

Who would sit down and sigh for a lost age of gold,
While the Lord of all ages is here?
True hearts will leap at the trumpet of God,
And those who can suffer can dare.
Each old age of gold was an iron age, too,
And the meekest of saints may find stern work to do
In the day of the Lord at hand, at hand,
In the day of the Lord at hand.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/the_day_of_wrath.php

That day of wrath, that dreadful day,
[or, The day of wrath…]
When Heav’n and earth shall pass away!
What pow’r shall be the sinner’s stay?
How shall he meet that dreadful day?

When, shriveling like a parchèd scroll,
The flaming heav’ns together roll;
When louder yet, and yet more dread;
Swells the high trump that wakes the dead.

O on that day, that wrathful day
When man to judgment wakes from clay,
Be Thou the trembling sinner’s stay,
Though Heav’n and earth shall pass away.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/the_day_thou_gavest_lord_is_ended.php

The day Thou gavest, Lord, is ended,
The darkness falls at Thy behest;
To Thee our morning hymns ascended,
Thy praise shall sanctify our rest.

We thank Thee that Thy church, unsleeping,
While earth rolls onward into light,
Through all the world her watch is keeping,
And rests not now by day or night.

As o’er each continent and island
The dawn leads on another day,
The voice of prayer is never silent,
Nor dies the strain of praise away.

The sun that bids us rest is waking
Our brethren ’neath the western sky,
And hour by hour fresh lips are making
Thy wondrous doings heard on high.

So be it, Lord; Thy throne shall never,
Like earth’s proud empires, pass away:
Thy kingdom stands, and grows forever,
Till all Thy creatures own Thy sway.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/the_day_o_lord_is_spent.php

The day, O Lord, is spent;
Abide with us, and rest;
Our hearts’ desires are fully bent
On making Thee our Guest.

We have not reached that land,
That happy land, as yet,
Where holy angels round Thee stand,
Whose sun can never set.

Our sun is sinking now;
Our day is almost o’er;
O Sun of Righteousness, do Thou
Shine on us evermore.

From men below the skies,
And all the heavenly host,
To God the Father praise arise,
The Son, and Holy Ghost.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/the_death_of_jesus_christ_our_lord.php

The death of Jesus Christ, our Lord,
We celebrate with one accord;
It is our comfort in distress,
Our heart’s sweet joy and happiness.

He blotted out with His own blood
The judgment that against us stood;
He full atonement for us made,
And all our debt He fully paid.

That this is now and ever true
He gives an earnest ever new:
In this His holy supper here
We taste His love so sweet, so near.

His Word proclaims, and we believe,
That in the supper we receive
His very body, as He said,
His very blood for sinners shed.

A precious food is this indeed—
It never fails us in our need—
A heavenly manna for our soul.
Until we safely reach our goal.

Oh, blest is each believing guest
Who in this promise finds his rest;
For Jesus will in love abide
With those who do in Him confide.

The guest that comes with true intent
To turn to God and to repent,
To live for Christ, to die to sin,
Will thus a holy life begin.

They who His Word do not believe
This food unworthily receive,
Salvation here will never find—
May we this warning keep in mind!

Help us sincerely to believe
That we may worthily receive
Thy supper and in Thee find rest.
Amen, he who believes is blest.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/the_duteous_day_now_closeth.php

The duteous day now closeth,
Each flower and tree reposeth,
Shade creeps o’er wild and wood:
Let us, as night is falling,
On God our Maker calling,
Give thanks to Him, the Giver good.

Now all the heav’nly splendor
Breaks forth in starlight tender
From myriad worlds unknown;
And man, the marvel seeing,
Forgets his selfish being,
For joy of beauty not his own.

Awhile his mortal blindness
May miss God’s lovingkindness,
And grope in faithless strife:
But when life’s day is over
Shall death’s fair night discover
The fields of everlasting life.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_d/the_dying_robber_raised_his_aching_bow.php

The dying robber raised his aching brow
To claim the dying Lord for company;
And heard, in answer to his trembling bow,
The promise of the King: Thou—even thou—
Today shalt be in Paradise with me.

We, too, the measure of our guilt confess,
Knowing Thy mercy, Lord, our only plea;
That we, like him, through judgment and distress,
For all the weight of our unworthiness
May win our way to Paradise with Thee.

But so bewildered is our failing heart,
So dim the luster of Thy royalty,
We hardly know Thee, Lord, for what Thou art,
Till we begin to take the better part
And lose ourselves in Paradise with Thee.

Then lift our eyes, dear Lord, from this poor dross,
To see Thee reigning in humility,
The King of love; that, wresting gain from loss,
We, too, may climb the ladder of the cross,
To find our home in Paradise with Thee.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/an_endless_line_of_splendor.php



An endless line of splendor,
These troops with Heav’n for home,
With creeds they go from Scotland,
With incense go from Rome.
These, in the Name of Jesus,
Against the dark gods stand,
They gird the earth with valor,
They heed their King’s command.

Onward the line advances,
Shaking the hills with power,
Slaying the hidden demons,
The lions that devour.
No bloodshed in the wrestling—
But souls new born arise—
The nations growing kinder,
The child-hearts growing wise.

What is the final ending?
The issue, can we know?
Will Christ outlive Mohammed?
Will Kali’s altar go?
This is our faith tremendous—
Our wild hope, who shall scorn—
That in the Name of Jesus
The world shall be reborn!
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/an_endless_prayer.php



If I have wounded any soul today,
If I have caused one foot to go astray,
If I have walked in my own willful way,
Dear Lord, forgive!

If I have uttered idle words or vain,
If I have turned aside from want or pain,
Lest I myself shall suffer through the strain,
Dear Lord, forgive!

If I have been perverse or hard, or cold,
If I have longed for shelter in Thy fold,
When Thou hast given me some fort to hold,
Dear Lord, forgive!

Forgive the sins I have confessed to Thee;
Forgive the secret sins I do not see;
O guide me, love me and my keeper be,
Dear Lord, Amen.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/an_exile_for_the_faith.php



An exile for the faith,
Of His incarnate Lord,
Beyond the stars, beyond all space,
His soul in vision soared.

There saw in glory Him
Who liveth, and was dead,
There Judah’s Lion, and the Lamb
That for our ransom bled.

There of the Kingdom learned
The mysteries sublime;
How, sown in martyrs’ blood, the faith
Should spread from clime to clime.

Lord, give us grace, like him,
In Thee to live and die;
To spurn the fleeting things of earth,
And seek for joys on high.

Jesu, our risen Lord,
We praise Thee and adore,
Who art with God the Father One
And Spirit evermore.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/each_cooing_dove_and_sighing_bough.php



Each cooing dove and sighing bough,
That makes the eve so blessed to me,
Has something far diviner now,
It bears me back to Galilee.
Refrain

O Galilee, sweet Galilee,
Where Jesus loved so much to be,
O Galilee, blue Galilee,
Come sing thy song again to me.

Each flowery glen and mossy dell,
Where happy birds in song agree,
Through sunny morn the praises tell
Of sights and sounds in Galilee.

Refrain

And when I read the thrilling lore
Of Him Who walked upon the sea,
I long, oh, how I long once more
To follow Him in Galilee.

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/each_day_i'll_do_a_golden_deed.php




Each day I値l do a golden deed,
By helping those who are in need,
My life on earth is but a span,
And so I値l do the best I can,
The best I can.
Refrain

Life痴 evening sun is sinking low,
A few more days and I must go
To meet the deeds that I have done,
Where there will be no setting sun.

To be a child of God each day,
My light must shine along the way;
I値l sing His praise while ages roll
And strive to help some troubled soul,
Some troubled soul.

Refrain

The only life that will endure,
Is one that痴 kind and good and pure;
And so for God I値l take my stand,
Each day I値l lend a helping hand,
A helping hand.

Refrain

I値l help someone in time of need,
And journey on with rapid speed;
I値l help the sick and poor and weak,
And words of kindness to them speak,
Kind words I値l speak.

Refrain

While going down life痴 weary road,
I値l try to lift some traveler痴 load;
I値l try to turn the night to day,
Make flowers bloom along the way,
The lonely way.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/each_for_the_other.php



Words and Music by John Peterson
© 1957 

Darling, the day has come that we've been dreaming of,
When at the altar white we'll say our vows of love;
Oh, what a happy time: all gone the doubt and fear,
And, with the promises, we'll add this one my Dear. 

Chorus
Each for the other and both for the Lord.
Oh, Darling Sweetheart, let the angels record;
Vows sweetly spoken; may they never be broken;
Each for the other, and both for the Lord. 

We'll walk together Love, thru sunshine - thru the shade,
We'll mingle tears and smiles and travel unafraid;
Halos of happiness will crown each passing day
Til heaven shines ahead and beckons us away. 


Chorus
Each for the other and both for the Lord.
Oh, Darling Sweetheart, let the angels record;
Vows sweetly spoken; may they never be broken;
Each for the other, and both for the Lord. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/each_step_i_take.php



Each step I take my Saviour goes before me,
And with His loving hand He leads the way,
And with each breath I whisper "I adore Thee;"
Oh, what joy to walk with Him each day. 

Ref:
Each step I take I know that He will guide me;
To higher ground He ever leads me on.
Until some day the last step will be taken.
Each step I take just leads me closer home.

At times I feel my faith begin to waver,
When up ahead I see a chasm wide.
It's then I turn and look up to my Saviour,
I am strong when He is by my side.

I trust in God, no matter come what may,
For life eternal in His hand,
He holds the key that opens up the way,
That will lead me to the promised land. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/eagles_wings.php



Here I am waiting
Abide in me I pray
Here I am longing for you
Hide me in your love
Bring me to my knees
May I know Jesus more and more

Come live in me
All my life
Take over
Come breathe in me
And I will rise
On eagle's wings

©1998 Reuben Morgan(Hillsong)/Integrity Music
CCLI #1596342





https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/early_my_god_without_delay.php



Early, my God, without delay,
I haste to seek Thy face;
My thirsty spirit faints away
Without Thy cheering grace.

So pilgrims on the scorching sand,
Beneath a burning sky,
Long for a cooling stream at hand,
And they must drink or die.

I’ve seen Thy glory and Thy power
Through all Thy temple shine;
My God, repeat that heav’nly hour,
That vision so divine.

Not all the blessings of a feast
Can please my soul so well,
As when Thy richer grace I taste,
And in Thy presence dwell.

Not life itself, with all her joys,
Can my best passions move,
Or raise so high my cheerful voice,
As Thy forgiving love.

Thus till my last expiring day
I’ll bless my God and King;
Thus will I lift my hands to pray,
And tune my lips to sing.





https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/earth_has_many_a_noble_city.php



Earth has many a noble city;
Bethlehem, thou dost all excel;
Out of thee the Lord from Heaven
Came to rule His Israel.

Fairer than the sun at morning
Was the star that told His birth,
To the world its God announcing
Seen in fleshly form on earth.

Eastern sages at His cradle
Make oblations rich and rare;
See them give, in deep devotion,
Gold and frankincense and myrrh.

Sacred gifts of mystic meaning:
Incense doth their God disclose,
Gold the King of kings proclaimeth,
Myrrh His sepulcher foreshows.

Jesu, whom the Gentiles worshipped
At Thy glad Epiphany,
Unto Thee, with God the Father
And the Spirit, glory be.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/earth_was_waiting_spent_and_rest_less.php



Earth was waiting, spent and restless,
with a mingled hope and fear,
faithful men and women praying,
"Surely, Lord, the day is near:
the Desire of all the nations--
it is time he should appear!"

Then the Spirit of the Highest
to a Virgin meek came down,
and he burdened her with blessing,
and he pained her with renown;
for she bore the Lord's Anointed
for his cross and for his crown.

Earth has groaned and labored for him
since the ages first began,
for in him was hid the secret
which through all the ages ran--
Son of Mary, Son of David,
Son of God, and Son of Man.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/earth_with_all_thy_thousand_voices.php



Earth, with all thy thousand voices,
Praise in songs th’eternal King;
Praise His Name, Whose praise rejoices
Ears that hear, and tongues that sing.
Lord, from each far-peopled dwelling,
Earth shall raise the glad acclaim;
All shall kneel, Thy greatness telling,
Sing Thy praise and bless Thy Name.

Come and hear the wondrous story,
How our mighty God of old,
In the terrors of His glory,
Back the flowing billows rolled;
Walked within the threatening waters,
Free we passed the upright wave,
Then was joy to Israel’s daughters,
Loud they sang His power to save.

Bless the Lord, Who ever liveth;
Sound His praise through every land,
Who our dying souls reviveth,
By Whose arm upheld we stand.
Now upon this cheerful morrow
We Thine altars will adorn,
And the gifts we vowed in sorrow
Pay on joy’s returning morn.

Come, each faithful soul, who fearest,
Him Who fills th’eternal throne:
Hear, rejoicing while thou hearest,
What our God for us hath done;
When we made our supplication,
When our voice in prayer was strong,
Then we found His glad salvation;
And His mercy fills our tongue.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/earth_rejoice_our_lord_is_king.php




Earth, rejoice, our Lord is King!
Sons of men, his praises sing;
Sing ye in triumphant strains,
Jesus the Messiah reigns!

Power is all to Jesus given,
Lord of hell, and earth, and heaven,
Every knee to him shall bow;
Satan, hear, and tremble now!

Angels and archangels join,
All triumphantly combine,
All in Jesu's praise agree,
Carrying on his victory.

Though the sons of night blaspheme,
More there are with us than them;
God with us, we cannot fear;
Fear, ye fiends, for Christ is hear!

Lo, to faith's enlightened sight,
All the mountain flames with light!
Hell is nigh, but God is nigher,
Circling us with hosts of fire.

Christ the Saviour is come down,
Points us to the victor's crown,
Bids us take our seats above,
More than conquerors in his love.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/earthly_pleasures_vainly_call_me.php




Earthly pleasures vainly call me;
I would be like Jesus;
Nothing worldly shall enthrall me;
I would be like Jesus.
Refrain

Be like Jesus, this my song,
In the home and in the throng;
Be like Jesus, all day long!
I would be like Jesus.

He has broken every fetter,
I would be like Jesus;
That my soul may serve Him better,
I would be like Jesus.

Refrain

All the way from earth to glory,
I would be like Jesus;
Telling over and over the story,
I would be like Jesus.

Refrain

That in heaven He may meet me,
I would be like Jesus;
That His words “Well done" may greet me,
I would be like Jesus.

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/earths_mighty_maker.php



Raised from the sea the solid land,
And drove each billowy heap away,
And bade the earth stand firm for aye:

That so, with flowers of golden hue,
The seeds of each it might renew;
And fruit trees bearing fruit might yield—
And pleasant pasture of the field;

Our spirit’s rankling wounds efface
With dewy freshness of Thy grace:
That grief may cleanse each deed of ill,
And o’er each lust may triumph still.

Let every soul Thy law obey,
And keep from every evil way;
Rejoice each promised good to win
And flee from every mortal sin.

O Father, that we ask be done,
Through Jesus Christ, Thine only Son;
Who, with the Holy Ghost and Thee,
Doth live and reign eternally.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/east_to_west.php

Words and music: Gary Miller © 2000 Anthony K. Music (ASCAP)

Lyrics:

As far as the east is from the west
As far as the worst is from the best
As far as the future's from the past
As for as the first is from the last

He is holy (You are holy, Lord)
I'm unworthy (I'm unworthy, Lord)
He is faithful (You are faithful, Lord)
In all of His ways (In all His ways)
He is worthy (You are worthy, Lord)
I'm unholy (I'm unholy, Lord)
He has taken my sins away (Oh so far away)
And oh how far He's taken
My sins away from me

As far as the Heaven's from the earth
As far as the dying from the birth
As far as the darkness from the light
As far as the blindness from the sight

He is holy
I'm unworthy
He is faithful
In all of His ways
He is worthy
I'm unholy
He has taken my sins away
And oh har far He's taken
My sins away from me
And oh how far He's taken
Our sins away from us
And oh how far He's taken
My sins away from me
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/easter_bells.php

O the Easter bells are gladly ringing,
Let the whole world join the happy lay,
Let the hills and vales break forth in singing,
Christ, the Lord of Life, is ris地 today.
Refrain

Hallelujah! Hallelujah!
Let the whole world join the happy lay,
Hallelujah! Hallelujah!
Christ, the Lord of Life, is ris地 today.

O the Easter bells are gladly ringing,
Hear the shouts along the King痴 highway;
Songs of praise the children, too, are singing,
Christ, the Lord of Life, is ris地 today.

Refrain

O the Easter bells are gladly ringing,
For the night of death has passed away,
Lo! the gates of morn are open swinging,
Christ, the Lord of Life, is ris地 today.

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/easter_carol.php

Lift up, O little children,
Your voices clear and sweet,
And sing the blessèd story
Of Christ, the Lord of glory,
And worship at His feet,
And worship at His feet.
Refrain

Oh, sing the blessèd story!
The Lord of life and glory
Is risen, as He said,
Is risen from the dead!

Lift up, O tender lilies,
Your whiteness to the sun;
The earth is not our prison,
Since Christ Himself hath risen,
The life of ev’ry one,
The life of ev’ry one.

Refrain

Ring, all ye bells of Easter,
Your chimes of joy again,
Ring out the night of sadness
Ring in the morn of gladness,
For death no more shall reign,
For death no more shall reign.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/easter_flowers_are_blooming_bright.php

Easter flowers are blooming bright,
Easter skies pour radiant light,
Christ our Lord is risen in might,
Glory in the highest!
Refrain

Alleluia! Alleluia!
Christ our Lord is risen in might,
Alleluia! Alleluia!

Angels caroled this sweet lay,
When in manger rude He lay,
Now once more cast grief away,
Glory in the highest!

Refrain

He, then born to grief and pain,
Now to glory born again,
Calleth forth our gladdest strain,
Glory in the highest!

Refrain

As He riseth, rise we too,
Tune we heart and voice anew,
Offering homage glad and true,
Glory in the highest!

Refrain




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/easter_joyous_easter.php

Easter, joyous Easter, holy happy time!
Bells ring out their message, joy in every chime;
Sweetly through their music, faint an echo swells,
Voices seem to mingle with the bells. (Glad Easter bells.)
Refrain

Seek ye not the living here among the dead;
Christ the Lord is risen, risen as He said;
Blessèd reassurance, gone the weary night,
Christ is risen! Easter breaks in floods of light!

Voices in a garden, near a rock-hewn tomb,
Gracious heav’nly voices, cheering earth’s dark gloom;
Voices from the glory, sent from thence to tell,
Jesus lives again! Immanuel! (Immanuel!)

Refrain

Other voices echo, through the Easter chime
One above all others, speaks with pow’r sublime;
Tender words of comfort, peace and love profound,
O’er the world today His words resound. (His words resound.)

Refrain





https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/easter_song.php

Snowdrops! lift your timid heads,
All the earth is waking,
Field and forest, brown and dead,
Into life are waking;
Snowdrops, rise, and tell the story,
How He rose, the Lord of glory.

Lilies! lilies! Easter calls!
Rise to meet the dawning
Of the blessèd light that falls
Through the Easter morning;
Ring your bells and tell the story,
How He rose, the Lord of glory.

Waken, sleeping butterflies,
Burst your narrow prison!
Spread your golden wings and rise,
For the Lord is risen;
Spread your wings and tell the story,
How He rose, the Lord of glory.





https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/echoes_from_heaven.php

Far away among the angels,
In the sweet celestial bow’rs,
Start the songs whose echoes gladden
As they greet this world of ours. 

Refrain:
Hear the echoes filled with glory,
From the bright angelic throng;
Oh, the pure seraphic music
Finds an echo in our song,
While it gently rolls along. 

How they stir the soul with rapture!
How they thrill the chords of love!
How they wake the songs of praises,
Floating up to worlds above! 

Far away in worlds of glory,
We can hear the music sweet,
Where the streams of life are flowing
All along the golden street. 

Far away in fields of glory
We shall meet, and God adore;
And the sweet redemption story
We shall sing forevermore. 





https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/echoes_from_the_burning_bush.php

Words and music: Bryon Foust & V. O. Summar © 1943, 1970 James D. Vaughan, Music 
Publisher

Lyrics:

Moses stood on holy ground
Far from God descended down
Set the roadside bush on fire (bush on fire)
Then the Lord did there explain
Through His servant should remain
All the echoes from the bush on fire (the bush on fire)

Chorus:
Oh the echoes from the bush (I hear those lovely echoes from the burning bush)
How they thrill my soul (how they thrill my soul)
Oh the echoes from the bush (I hear those thrilling echoes from the burning 
bush)
Point me to the goal (point me to the goal)
I no more am doubting, but with joy I'm shouting
With no thought of shame to blush (no shame to blush)
This my song shall ever be, words that are so sweet to me
Echoes from the burning bush (the burning bush)

God sent down His only Son
Just to ransom everyone
By the echoes from the fire (from the fire)
God of every earthly land
Would not pick nor choose a man
For His blood will save us from the fire (eternal fire)

Repeat Chorus





https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/education.php

Words and Music: Andrew McNeil © 1996 Anthony K. Music (ASCAP)

Lyrics: 

Chorus:
People won't you listen
When I say this I'm simply not dissin
Education, know that you need it
You need it, believe it, conceive it 

I know 'cause I've been there
So let me share these few words with you
And let it be understood
Keep your mind fixed in '96
Education is the key
Stay behind me Satan not in front of me
Times are hard for the brother man
Start now prepare for you a better man
Keep your head in those books
You just don't know what it took
The blood stains remain from the innocent
Can you see why I recommend it? 

Bridge:
(Come on believe, come on believe, come on believe, come on beleive)
(Come on believe, come on believe, come on believe, come on believe)
(Come on believe, come on believe, come on believe, come on believe)
(Come on believe, come on believe, come on believe, come on believe) 

Repeat Chorus 

Deep South, Underground Railroad
The Holocaust you know, in Nazi Germany
Bloody path to opportunity
Here is a window open it up so you can see now
Don't let their work be in vain
The pain, the shame, some went insane
When they took of their own seed
Crushed against a stone
Ooh dirty wrong, oh so dirty wrong
Sold for a penny and a dime and a nickel
Thought we were simple I beg to differ
And now we've got to strive for the right 
Stand up for the right, stand up for the right 

Repeat Bridge 

Repeat Chorus 

Won't you listen...
Repeat Bridge (with stepouts) 

Repeat Chorus (with stepouts) 

Repeat Chorus and Bridge (together) 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/elijah_rock.php

Chorus:
(Elijah rock) Elijah rock, shout, shout
(Elijah rock) Elijah rock, comin' up Lord
(Elijah rock) Elijah rock, shout, shout
(Elijah rock) Elijah rock, comin' up Lord
Repeat (with various sand sundry variations) (x4)

(Don't you know that Satan's a liar)
Satan's a liar and a conjur too
(And if you don't watch out)
If you don't watch out he'll conjur you
(If I could, surely I would)
If I could I surely would
(I'd stand on the rock where Moses stood)
I'd stand on the rock where Moses stood

Elijah rock
Shout about it
Elijah, Elijah, Elijah rock
Shout about, oh (shout)
Shout about
Elijah rock comin' up
Elijah rock comin' up
Elijah rock comin' up Lord

Satan's a liar and a conjur too
If you don't watch out he'll conjur you

Repeat Chorus 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/elijahs_god.php

Elijah made a sacrifice
To offer to Jehovah;
It had been wet with water thrice,
Baal's sacrifice was over.
Elijah prayed: the fire came down
And licked the water all around;
So doubting ones believed, and found
Elijah's God was living.

Refrain:
Elijah's God still lives today,
To take the guilt of sin away;
And when I pray my heart's desire,
Upon my soul He sends the fire.

Elijah's God still lives today,
And answers still by fire;
My friend, just let Him have His way;
He'll grant your heart's desire,
Consume the sacrifice you make;
And bid your slumb'ring soul awake;
The chain of inbred sin will break;
Elijah's God is living.

Elijah's God still lives today,
And answers still in power,
As when Elijah prayed for rain,
God answered with a shower.
If you would have your soul refreshed,
With rain that falls from heaven,
You must pray thro' like all the rest,
And showers shall be given.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/embrace_me_now.php

To You O Lord my God
I make this simple prayer
Surrendering my life
Wholeheartedly to You

Painful disappointments
Is all this world can offer
But You O Lord my God 
Bring me tranquillity 

CHORUS

Embrace me now my Lord!
Embrace me now my Lord!
I want to feel Your presence
Deep down inside my soul

Embrace me now my Lord!
Embrace me now my Lord!
I want to feel Your power
Deep down inside my soul

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/embrace_your_people.php

To adore You, to exalt You
We are together on Your altar
We want to give You honour and praise
Please You with all of our love!

Not to ask You, only to thank You
And Your holy name glorify
Our entire heart needs more of
Needs more of Your power

CHORUS

Embrace Your people O my Lord
Embrace us with Your amazing love
We want to feel Your hands
Pour down upon us Your holy presence

I know You are here, we all can feel
Your holy presence among us
It’s so good to be very close to You
We want to hear Your voice
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/elijahs_god.php

Elijah made a sacrifice
To offer to Jehovah;
It had been wet with water thrice,
Baal's sacrifice was over.
Elijah prayed: the fire came down
And licked the water all around;
So doubting ones believed, and found
Elijah's God was living.

Refrain:
Elijah's God still lives today,
To take the guilt of sin away;
And when I pray my heart's desire,
Upon my soul He sends the fire.

Elijah's God still lives today,
And answers still by fire;
My friend, just let Him have His way;
He'll grant your heart's desire,
Consume the sacrifice you make;
And bid your slumb'ring soul awake;
The chain of inbred sin will break;
Elijah's God is living.

Elijah's God still lives today,
And answers still in power,
As when Elijah prayed for rain,
God answered with a shower.
If you would have your soul refreshed,
With rain that falls from heaven,
You must pray thro' like all the rest,
And showers shall be given.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/empty_mansions.php

[G] HERE I LABOR AND TOIL AS I [C] LOOK FOR A [G] HOME
JUST AN HUMBLE ABODE AMONG [D] MEN
WHILE IN [G] HEAVEN A MANSION IS [C] WITING FOR[G] ME
AND A GENTLE VOICE [D] PLEADING COME [G] IN

[G] THERE?S A MANSION NOW EMPTY JUST [C] WAITING FOR [G] ME
AT THE END OF LIFE?S TROUBLESOME [D] WAY
MANY [G] FRIENDS AND DEAR LOVED ONES WILL [C] WELCOME ME [G] THERE
NEAR THE DOOR OF THAT [D] MANSION SOME [G]DAY

[G] WHEN MY LABOR AND TOILING HAVE [C] ENDED BE [G] LOW
AND MY HANDS SHALL BE FOLDED IN [D] REST
I?LL EX [G] CHANGE THIS OLD HOME FOR A [C] MANSION UP [G] THERE
AND INVITE THE ARCH [D] ANGEL AS [G] GUESTS


[G] THERE?S A MANSION NOW EMPTY JUST [C] WAITING FOR [G] ME
AT THE END OF LIFE?S TROUBLESOME [D] WAY
MANY [G] FRIENDS AND DEAR LOVED ONES WILL [C] WELCOME ME [G] THERE
NEAR THE DOOR OF THAT [D] MANSION SOME [G]DAY
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/encamped_along_the_hills_of_light.php

Encamped along the hills of light,
Ye Christian soldiers, rise.
And press the battle ere the night
Shall veil the glowing skies.
Against the foe in vales below
Let all our strength be hurled.
Faith is the victory, we know,
That overcomes the world.
Refrain

Faith is the victory! Faith is the victory!
O glorious victory, that overcomes the world.

His banner over us is love,
Our sword the Word of God.
We tread the road the saints above
With shouts of triumph trod.
By faith, they like a whirlwind’s breath,
Swept on o’er every field.
The faith by which they conquered death
Is still our shining shield.

Refrain

On every hand the foe we find
Drawn up in dread array.
Let tents of ease be left behind,
And onward to the fray.
Salvation’s helmet on each head,
With truth all girt about,
The earth shall tremble ’neath our tread,
And echo with our shout.

Refrain

To him that overcomes the foe,
White raiment shall be giv’n.
Before the angels he shall know
His name confessed in Heav’n.
Then onward from the hill of light,
Our hearts with love aflame,
We’ll vanquish all the hosts of night,
In Jesus’ conqu’ring Name.

Refrain




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/endearing_lord.php

O Christ divine, O God of love,
Thou source of every good;
I’ll live in time and heav’n above,
And serve Thee as I should. 

Refrain:
Endearing Lord! Majestic One!
With radiant glories crowned;
Oh, Thou hast conquered, I have come,
Thy pard’ning grace I’ve found. 

Sweet peace and love now reign within,
Like rolling rivers flow;
Thus keeping all my life from sin
In this vain world below. 

My life and breath are in Thy hand,
My joys and all I know;
I live and breathe at Thy command—
Then shall I leave Thee? No. 

Lord, if I had ten thousand lives,
I’d give them all to Thee;
Thy matchless goodness surely proves
Thy wondrous love to me. 

Majestic Christ! O dearest Friend!
Thou princely One so pure;
Let men and angel voices blend,
Thy royal name adore. 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/endlessly.php

Saviour of my soul,
Lover of my life,
I love You endlessly,
Passion of my heart,
Everything You are,
I love You endlessly.

You love me, 
Before I knew of You,
You love me,
Now I give it back to You.

With Your Majesty here,
I fall to my knees,
I love You endlessly,
With the beaty of Your Son,
I find myself undone.
I love You endlessly.

Saviour of my soul,
Lover of my life,
I love You endlessly.
Passion of my heart,
Everything You Are,
I love You endlessly. 

You love me,
Before I knew of You,
You love me,
Now I give it back to You.

With Your Majesty here,
I fall to my knees,
I love You endlessly,
With the beaty of Your Son,
I find myself undone.
I love You endlessly.

You love me,
Before I knew of You,
You love me,
Now I give it back to You. [x2]

With Your Majesty here,
I fall to my knees,
I love You endlessly,
With the beaty of Your Son,
I find myself undone.
I love You endlessly. [x4]

Endlessly


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/enemys_camp.php

I went to the enemy's camp
And I took back what he stole from me,
I took back what he stole from me,
Took back what he stole from me.
I went to the enemy's camp
And I took back what he stole from me.

He's under my feet,
He's under my feet,
He's under my feet,
He's under my feet,
He's under my feet,
He's under my feet,
Satan is under my feet.

CCLI Song ID #467628 

©1991 Sound III, Inc. ASCAP Admin. by All Nations Music
Words and Music by Richard Black


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/enjoy_your_life_today.php

1. Enjoy your life today,
Skies be they bright or grey,
All's but a dream.
He let us choose the way,
All that we do and say,
What right we deem.
What right we deem.

2. Live as you plan to die,
At peace with all that vie
For space on earth.
Don't dwell on vengeful thought,
Be glad what God hath wrought,
For us to share,
For us to bear.

3. If life is living hell,
Did you not help as well?
Whom did you fear.
Heaven is in your mind.
If you're at peace you'll find.
Heaven is near.
Heaven is here.

4. Heaven's reward's unknown,
None sent a letter home
Advising you.
Memories of you, is all
People you've met, recall,
Good and bad too,
Bad and good too.

5. Is life a blink of eye?
Is life a soul to vie
Eternally?
Those who you leave behind
Will let you live, in mind,
A short time or
For evermore.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/enoch_walked_with_god.php

Words and music: Hank Fenn © 1995 Anthony K. Music (ASCAP)

Lyrics: 

Living by faith
Is a thing that's hard to do
Enoch was a man
Whose faith was strong and true
For 300 years
Enoch walked with God each day
Then he was no more
For God took him away 

Chorus:
God took Enoch from this life
He was gone from earth but he did not die
Enoch's steadfast saving faith
Pleased God and He took him away 

Faith is belief in God
Though he can't be seen
And without faith
He is impossible to please
For God rewards those
Who seek him earnestly
And as he did with Enoch
He will take them away 

Repeat Chorus (x2) 

(Took him away, took him away) 

(interlude)


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/enough_song.php

There comes a time in this life
You get tired of trying again
A thousand questions resound in your mind
Justifications you can’t understand

So how do you get out of this cycle?
What can you do to stop your pain?
Just use the power already inside you
Nothing to lose everything to gain

CHORUS

The hour has come, there’s no doubt
I am drawing a line in the sand
Enough is enough, is my shout
No turning back, this is where I stand!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/enslaved_by_sin_and_bound_by_chains.php

Enslaved by sin and bound in chains,
Beneath its dreadful tyrant sway,
And doomed to everlasting pains,
We wretched, guilty captives lay.

Nor gold nor gems could buy our peace,
Nor all the world’s collected store
Suffice to purchase our release;
A thousand worlds were all too poor.

Jesus, the Lord, the mighty God,
An all sufficient ransom paid.
O matchless price! His precious blood
For vile, rebellious traitors shed.

Jesus the Sacrifice became
To rescue guilty souls from hell;
The spotless, bleeding, dying Lamb
Beneath avenging Justice fell.

Amazing goodness! Love divine!
Oh, may our grateful hearts adore
The matchless grace nor yield to sin
Nor wear its cruel fetters more!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/enter_and_worship_here.php

Enter and worship here,
The Bride invites thee—Come;
The Spirit bids thee cast out fear,
And make the Church thy home.

Enter and bless the Lord,
And meditate His grace;
Feast on the manna of His Word,
And consecrate this place.

Enter and rest and pray,
Lift to the hills thine eyes;
Praise Him, and offer up today
Thy heart, a sacrifice.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/entering_into_the_congregation.php

O Thou, Whom all Thy saints adore,
We now with all Thy saints agree,
And bow our inmost souls before
Thy glorious, awful majesty.

Thee, King of nations, we proclaim:
Who would not our great Sovereign fear?
We long to experience all Thy Name,
And now we come to meet Thee here.

We come, great God, to seek Thy face,
And for Thy loving-kindness wait;
And O how dreadful is this place!
’Tis God’s own house, ’tis Heaven’s gate.

Tremble our hearts to find Thee nigh;
To Thee our trembling hearts aspire;
And lo! we see descend from high
The pillar and the flame of fire.

Still let it on the assembly stay,
And all the house with glory fill;
To Canaan’s bounds point out the way,
And lead us to Thy holy hill.

There let us all with Jesus stand,
And join the general church above,
And take our seats at Thy right hand,
And sing Thine everlasting love.

Come, Lord, our souls are on the wing,
Now on Thy great white throne appear,
And let my eyes behold my King,
And let me see my Savior there.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/enthroned_is_jesus_now.php

Enthroned is Jesus now,
Upon His heavenly seat;
The kingly crown is on His brow,
The saints are at His feet.

In shining white they stand,
A great and countless throng;
A palmy scepter in each hand,
On every lip a song.

They sing the Lamb of God,
Once slain on earth for them;
The Lamb, through Whose atoning blood,
Each wears his diadem.

Thy grace, O Holy Ghost,
Thy blessèd help supply,
That we may join that radiant host,
Triumphant in the sky.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/enthroned_on_high_almighty_lord.php

Enthroned on high, almighty Lord!
The Holy Ghost send down;
Fulfill in us Thy faithful word,
And all Thy mercies crown.

Though on our heads no tongues of fire
Their wondrous powers impart,
Grant, Savior, what we more desire,
Thy Spirit in our heart.

Spirit of life, and light, and love,
Thy heav’nly influence give;
Quicken our souls, our guilt remove,
That we in Christ may live.

To our benighted minds reveal
The glories of His grace.
And bring us where no clouds conceal
The brightness of His face.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/entreat_me_not_to_leave.php

Entreat me not to leave thee,
My heart goes with thee now;
Why turn my footsteps homeward?
No friend so dear as thou!
Thy heart has borne my sorrow,
And I have wept for thine;
And now how can I leave thee?
Oh, let thy lot be mine.
Refrain

Entreat me not to leave thee,
Entreat me not to leave thee,
Or to return from following after thee;
For where thou goest I will go,
And where thou lodgest I will lodge;
Thy people shall be my people,
And thy God my God,
Thy people shall be my people,
And thy God my God.

I’ll follow where thou leadest;
My love will cling to thee;
And where thy head is pillowed,
My nightly rest shall be;
Thy birthplace and thy kindred
I’ll cherish like my own;
Thy God shall be my refuge,
I’ll worship at His throne.

Refrain

Where death’s cold hand shall find thee,
There let my eyelids close,
And, in the grave beside thee,
This mortal frame repose:
Oh, do not now entreat me;
No friend so dear as thou;
My heart would break in anguish
If I should leave thee now.

Refrain



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/ere_god_had_built_the_mountains.php

Ere God had built the mountains,
Or raised the fruitful hills;
Before He filled the fountains
That feed the running rills;
In me from everlasting,
The wonderful I Am,
Found pleasures never wasting,
And Wisdom is my name.

When, like a tent to dwell in,
He spread the skies abroad,
And swathed about the swelling
Of Ocean’s mighty flood;
He wrought by weight and measure,
And I was with Him then:
Myself the Father’s pleasure,
And mine, the sons of men.

Thus Wisdom’s words discover
Thy glory and Thy grace,
Thou everlasting Lover
Of our unworthy race!
Thy gracious eye surveyed us
Ere stars were seen above;
In wisdom Thou hast made us,
And died for us in love.

And couldst Thou be delighted
With creatures such as we,
Who, when we saw Thee, slighted,
And nailed Thee to a tree?
Unfathomable wonder,
And mystery divine!
The voice that speaks in thunder,
Says, “Sinner, I am thine!"



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/ere_i_sleep_for_every_favor.php

Ere I sleep, for every favor,
This day showed, by my God,
I will bless my Savior.

O my Lord, what shall I render
To Thy Name, still the same,
Gracious, good, and tender?

Leave me not, but ever love me;
Let Thy peace, be my bliss,
Till Thou hence remove me.




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/ere_in_thy_childhood.php

Ere in thy childhood, 'mid the desert places,
thou hadst a refuge from the city gained,
far from all slander and its bitter traces
living unstained.

Often had prophets in the distant ages
sung to announce the Daystar and to name him;
but as the Savior, last of all the sages,
thou didst proclaim him.

Than John the Baptist, none of all Eve's daughters
'ere bore a greater, whether high or lowly:
he was thought worthy, washing in the waters
Jesus the holy.

Angels in orders everlasting praise thee,
God, in thy triune majesty tremendous;
hark to the prayers we, penitents, upraise thee:
save and defend us.





https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/ere_mountains_reared_their_form_sublime.php

Ere mountains reared their forms sublime,
Or Heav’n and earth in order stood,
Before the birth of ancient time,
From everlasting Thou art God.

A thousand ages, in their flight,
With Thee are as a fleeting day;
Past, present, future, to Thy sight
At once their various scenes display.

But our brief life’s a shadowy dream,
A passing thought that soon is o’er,
That fades with morning’s earliest beam,
And fills the musing mind no more.

To us, O Lord, the wisdom give
Each passing moment so to spend,
That we at length with Thee may live
Where life and bliss shall never end.




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/ere_the_blue_heavns_were_stretched_abroad.php

Ere the blue heav’ns were stretched abroad,
From everlasting was the Word:
With God He was; the Word was God,
And must divinely be adored.

By His own power were all things made;
By Him supported all things stand;
He is the whole creation’s Head,
And angels fly at His command.

Ere sin was born, or Satan fell,
He led the host of morning stars:
Thy generation who can tell,
Or count the numbers of Thy years?

But lo! He leaves those heav’nly forms,
The Word descends and dwells in clay,
That He may hold converse with worms,
Dressed in such feeble flesh as they.

Mortals with joy beheld His face,
Th’ eternal Father’s only Son;
How full of truth! how full of grace!
When through His eyes the Godhead shone.

Archangels leave their high abode
To learn new mysteries here, and tell
The loves of our descending God,
The glories of Immanuel.




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/ere_yet_the_dawn_has_filled_the_skies.php

Ere yet the dawn has filled the skies,
Behold, my Savior Christ arise;
He chaseth from us sin and night,
And brings us joy and life and light.

O stronger Thou than death and hell!
Where is the foe Thou canst not quell,
What heavy stone Thou canst not roll
From off the prisoned, anguished soul?

If Jesus lives, can I be sad?
I know He loves me, and am glad;
Though all the world were dead to me,
Enough, O Christ, if I have Thee!

He feeds me, comforts and defends,
And when I die His angel sends
To bear me whither He is gone,
For of His own He loseth none.

Strong Champion! For this comfort, see,
The whole world brings her thanks to Thee;
And once we, too, shall raise above
More sweet and loud the song of love.




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/ere_you_left_your_room_this_morning.php

Ere you left your room this morning,
Did you think to pray?
In the name of Christ our Savior,
Did you sue for loving favor,
As a shield today?
Refrain

O how praying rests the weary!
Prayer will change the night to day;
So when life seems dark and dreary,
Don’t forget to pray.

When you met with great temptation,
Did you think to pray?
By His dying love and merit,
Did you claim the Holy Spirit
As your guide and stay?

Refrain

When your heart was filled with anger,
Did you think to pray?
Did you plead for grace, my brother,
That you might forgive another
Who had crossed your way?

Refrain

When sore trials came upon you,
Did you think to pray?
When your soul was bowed in sorrow,
Balm of Gilead did you borrow
At the gates of day?

Refrain



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/eternal_beam_of_light_divine.php

Eternal Beam of light divine,
Fountain of unexhausted love,
In Whom the Father’s glories shine
Through earth beneath, and Heaven above;

Jesu, the weary wanderer’s rest,
Give me Thy easy yoke to bear,
With steadfast patience arm my breast,
With spotless love, and lowly fear. 

Thankful I take the cup from Thee,
Prepared and mingled by Thy skill,
Though bitter to the taste it be,
Powerful the wounded soul to heal. 

Be Thou, O Rock of ages, nigh!
So shall each murmuring thought be gone,
And grief, and fear, and care, shall fly,
As clouds before the mid-day sun. 

Speak to my warring passions, “Peace!"
Say to my trembling heart, “Be still!"
Thy power my strength and fortress is,
For all things serve Thy sovereign will. 

O death! where is thy sting? Where now
Thy boasted victory, O grave?
Who shall contend with God? or who
Can hurt whom God delights to save?


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/eternal_depth_of_love_divine.php

Eternal depth of love divine,
In Jesus, God with us, displayed;
How bright Thy beaming glories shine!
How wide Thy healing streams are spread!

With whom dost Thou delight to dwell?
Sinners, a vile and thankless race:
O God, what tongue aright can tell
How vast Thy love, how great Thy grace!

The dictates of Thy sovereign will
With joy our grateful hearts receive:
All Thy delight in us fulfill;
Lo! all we are to Thee we give.

To Thy sure love, Thy tender care,
Our flesh, soul, spirit, we resign:
O fix Thy sacred presence there,
And seal the abode for ever Thine.

O King of glory, Thy rich grace
Our feeble thought surpasses far;
Yea, even our crimes, though numberless,
Less numerous than Thy mercies are.

Still, Lord, Thy saving health display,
And arm our souls with heav’nly zeal;
So fearless shall we urge our way
Through all the powers of earth and hell.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/eternal_father_thou_hast_said.php
Eternal Father, Thou hast said
  That Christ all glory shall obtain;
  That He Who once a suff’rer bled
  Shall o’er the world a conqu’ror reign.

  We wait Thy triumph, Savior King,
  Long ages have prepared Thy way;
  Now all abroad Thy banner fling,
  Set time’s great battle in array.

  Thy hosts are mustered to the field;
  “The Cross! the Cross!" the battle call;
  The old grim towers of darkness yield,
  And soon shall totter to their fall.

  On mountain tops the watch fires glow,
  Where scattered wide the watchmen stand;
  Voice echoes voice, and onward flow
  The joyous shouts from land to land.

  Oh, fill the Church with faith and power!
  Bid her long nights of weeping cease;
  To groaning nations haste the hour
  Of life and freedom, light and peace.

  Come, Spirit, make Thy wonders known,
  Fulfill the Father’s high decree;
  Then earth, the might of hell o’er thrown,
  Shall keep her last great jubilee.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/eternal_father_when_to_thee.php
Eternal Father, when to Thee,
  Beyond all worlds, by faith I soar,
  Before Thy boundless majesty
  I stand in silence, and adore.

  But Savior, Thou art by my side;
  Thy voice I hear, Thy face I see:
  Thou art my Friend, my daily Guide;
  God over all, yet God with me.

  And Thou, great Spirit, in my heart,
  Dost make Thy temple day by day;
  The Holy Ghost of God Thou art,
  Yet dwellest in this house of clay.

  Blest Trinity, in Whom alone
  All things created move or rest,
  High in the heavens Thou hast Thy throne;
  Thou hast Thy throne within my breast.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/eternal_glory_of_the_sky.php
Eternal Glory of the sky,
  Blest Hope of frail humanity,
  The Father’s sole begotten One,
  Yet born a spotless virgin’s Son!

  Uplift us with Thine arm of might,
  And let our hearts rise pure and bright,
  And, ardent in God’s praises, pay
  The thanks we owe him every day.

  The day-star’s rays are glittering clear,
  And tell that day itself is near:
  The shadows of the night depart;
  Thou, holy Light, illume the heart!

  Within our senses ever dwell,
  And worldly darkness thence expel;
  Long as the days of life endure,
  Preserve our souls devout and pure.

  The faith that first must be possessed,
  Root deep within our inmost breast;
  And joyous hope in second place,
  Then charity, Thy greatest grace.

  All laud to God the Father be,
  All praise, eternal Son, to Thee;
  All glory, as is ever meet,
  To God the holy Paraclete.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/eternal_god_how_theyre_increased.php

                    Eternal God, how they’re increased
                    Who greatly trouble me!
                    How many are the men that stand
                    In triumph over me!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/eternal_god_whose_power_upholds.php
Eternal God, Whose power upholds
  Both flower and flaming star,
  To Whom there is no here nor there,
  No time, no near nor far,
  No alien race, no foreign shore,
  No child unsought, unknown,
  O send us forth, Thy prophets true,
  To make all lands Thine own!

  O God of love, Whose Spirit wakes
  In every human breast,
  Whom love, and love alone can know,
  In Whom all hearts find rest,
  Help us to spread Thy gracious reign
  Till greed and hate shall cease,
  And kindness dwell in human hearts,
  And all the earth find peace!

  O God of truth, Whom science seeks
  And reverent souls adore,
  Who lightest every earnest mind
  Of every clime and shore,
  Dispel the gloom of error’s night,
  Of ignorance and fear,
  Until true wisdom from above
  Shall make life’s pathway clear!

  O God of beauty, oft revealed
  In dreams of human art,
  In speech that flows to melody,
  In holiness of heart,
  Teach us to ban all ugliness
  That blinds our eyes to Thee,
  Till all shall know the loveliness
  Of lives made fair and free.

  O God of righteousness and grace,
  Seen in the Christ, Thy Son,
  Whose life and death reveal Thy face,
  By Whom Thy will was done.
  Inspire Thy heralds of good news
  To live Thy life divine,
  Till Christ has formed in all mankind
  And every land is Thine!

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/eternal_god_your_loves_tremendous_glory.php
Eternal God, your love's tremendous glory
  cascades through life in overflowing grace,
  to tell creation's meaning in the story
  of love evolving love from time and space.

  Eternal Son of God, uniquely precious,
  in you, deserted, scorned, crucified,
  God's love has fathomed sin and death's deep darkness,
  and flawed humanity is glorified.

  Eternal Spirit, with us like a mother,
  embracing us in love serene and pure:
  you nurture strength to follow Christ our brother,
  as full-grown children, confident and sure.

  Love's trinity, self-perfect, self-sustaining;
  love which commands, enables, and obeys:
  you give yourself, in boundless joy, creating
  one vast increasing harmony of praise.

  We ask you now, complete your image in us;
  this love of yours, our source and guide and goal.
  May love in us seek love and serve love's purpose,
  till we ascend with Christ and find love whole.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/eternal_life_is_in_gods_word.php
Eternal life is in God’s Word
  For dead and dying men;
  By it alone we know the Lord,
  Unseen by mortal ken.
  Refrain

  O blessèd Word, O gracious Word,
  We’ll love thee more and more;
  Be thou our Life, our Strength, our Sword,
  ’Till earthly strife is o’er.

  God’s strength is in His holy Word;
  We need it ev’ry day;
  In all our conflicts this the sword
  Our spirit foes to slay.

  Refrain

  By this same Word we know our task,
  And how it should be done;
  How now to live, and how at last
  Our crown is to be won.

  Refrain
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/eternal_light.php
Eternal Light! eternal Light!
  How pure the soul must be
  When, placed within Thy searching sight,
  It shrinks not, but with calm delight
  Can live, and look on Thee!

  The spirits that surround Thy throne
  May bear the burning bliss;
  But that is surely theirs alone,
  Since they have never, never known
  A fallen world like this.

  O how shall I, whose native sphere
  Is dark, whose mind is dim,
  Before the Ineffable appear,
  And on my naked spirit bear
  That uncreated beam?

  There is a way for man to rise
  To that sublime abode:
  An offering and a sacrifice,
  A Holy Spirit’s energies,
  An Advocate with God.

  These, these prepare us for the sight
  Of holiness above;
  The sons of ignorance and night,
  May dwell in the eternal Light,
  Through the eternal Love.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/eternal_light_divinity.php
Eternal Light, Divinity,
  O Unity in Trinity,
  thy holy name thy servants bless,
  to thee we pray, and thee confess.

  We praise the Father, mighty One;
  we praise the sole-begotten Son;
  we praise the Holy Ghost above,
  who joins them in one bond of love.

  For of the Father infinite,
  begotten is the Light of light,
  and from his love eternally
  proceeds the Spirit, God most high.

  None can more high or holy be,
  co-equal is their Deity,
  the substance of the Three is One,
  and equal laud to them is done.

  The Three are One Immensity,
  the Three One highest Verity,
  the Three One perfect Charity,
  and they are man's Felicity.

  O Verity! O Charity!
  O Ending and Felicity!
  In thee we hope, in thee believe,
  thyself we love, to thee we cleave.

  Thou First and Last, from whom there springs
  the Fount of all created things,
  thou art the Life which moves the whole,
  sure Hope of each believing soul.

  Thou who alone the world hast made,
  art still its one sufficing aid,
  the only Light for gazing eyes,
  and, unto them that hope, the Prize.

  O Father, Source of God the Word,
  O Word with him co-equal Lord,
  O Spirit of like majesty,
  O Triune God, all praise to thee.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/eternal_monarch_king_most_high.php
Eternal Monarch, King most high,
  Whose blood hath brought redemption nigh,
  By Whom the death of Death was wrought,
  And conquering grace’s battle fought.

  Ascending to the throne of might,
  And seated at the Father’s right,
  All power in Heav’n is Jesu’s own,
  That here His manhood had not known.

  That so, in nature’s triple frame,
  Each heav’nly and each earthly name,
  And things in hell’s abyss abhorred,
  May bend the knee and own Him Lord.

  Yea, angels tremble when they see
  How changed is our humanity;
  That flesh hath purged what flesh had stained,
  And God, the Flesh of God, hath reigned.

  Be Thou our joy and strong defense,
  Who art our future recompense;
  So shall the light that springs from Thee
  Be ours through all eternity.

  O risen Christ, ascended Lord,
  All praise to Thee let earth accord,
  Who art, while endless ages run,
  With Father and with Spirit One.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/eternal_one_thou_living_god.php
Eternal One, Thou living God,
  Whom changing years unchanged reveal,
  With Thee their way our fathers trod;
  The hand they held, in ours we feel.

  The same our trust, the same our need,
  In sorrow’s stress, in duty’s hour;
  We keep their faith, by Thee decreed,
  That faith the fount of all our power.

  We bless Thee for the growing light;
  Th’advancing thought, the wid’ning view,
  The larger freedom, clearer sight,
  Which from the old unfolds the new.

  With wider view, come loftier goal;
  With fuller light, more good to see;
  With freedom, truer self control,
  With knowledge, deeper reverence be.

  Anew we pledge ourselves to Thee,
  To follow where Thy truth shall lead;
  Afloat upon its boundless sea,
  Who sails with God is safe indeed!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/eternal_power_of_earth_and_air.php
Eternal Power, of earth and air!
  Unseen, yet seen in all around,
  Remote, but dwelling everywhere,
  Though silent, heard in every sound.

  If e’er Thine ear in mercy bent,
  When wretched mortals cried to Thee,
  And if, indeed, Thy Son was sent,
  To save lost sinners such as me:

  Then hear me now, while, kneeling here,
  I lift to thee my heart and eye,
  And all my soul ascends in prayer,
  Oh, give me, give me faith! I cry.

  Without some glimmering in my heart,
  I could not raise this fervent prayer;
  But, oh! a stronger light impart,
  And in Thy mercy fix it there.

  While Faith is with me, I am blest;
  It turns my darkest night to day;
  But while I clasp it to my breast,
  I often feel it slide away.

  Then, cold and dark, my spirit sinks,
  To see my light of life depart;
  And every fiend of Hell, methinks,
  Enjoys the anguish of my heart.

  What shall I do, if all my love,
  My hopes, my toil, are cast away,
  And if there be no God above,
  To hear and bless me when I pray?

  If this be vain delusion all,
  If death be an eternal sleep,
  And none can hear my secret call,
  Or see the silent tears I weep!

  Oh, help me, God! For Thou alone
  Canst my distracted soul relieve;
  Forsake it not: it is Thine own,
  Though weak, yet longing to believe.

  Oh, drive these cruel doubts away;
  And make me know, that Thou art God!
  A faith, that shines by night and day,
  Will lighten every earthly load.

  If I believe that Jesus died,
  And, waking, rose to reign above;
  Then surely Sorrow, Sin, and Pride,
  Must yield to Peace, and Hope, and Love.

  And all the blessèd words He said
  Will strength and holy joy impart:
  A shield of safety o’er my head,
  A spring of comfort in my heart.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/eternal_power_whose_high_abode.php
Eternal Power, Whose high abode
  Becomes the grandeur of a God,
  Infinite lengths beyond the bounds
  Where stars resolve their little rounds!

  The lowest step around Thy seat,
  Rises too high for Gabriel’s feet;
  In vain the favored angel tries
  To reach Thine height with wond’ring eyes.

  There while the first archangel sings,
  He hides his face behind his wings,
  And ranks of shining thrones around
  Fall worshiping, and spread the ground.

  Lord, what shall earth and ashes do?
  We would adore our Maker, too;
  From sin and dust to Thee we cry,
  The Great, the Holy, and the High.

  Earth from afar has heard Thy fame,
  And worms have learned to lisp Thy Name;
  But, O! the glories of Thy mind
  Leave all our soaring thoughts behind.

  God is in Heaven, and men below;
  Be short our tunes, our words be few;
  A solemn reverence checks our songs,
  And praise sits silent on our tongues.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/eternal_rest.php
Time’s clock is striking the hour,
  Jesus will soon descend,
  Clothed in the garments of power,
  The reign of sin to end.
  Then will this anthem be ringing
  Like to a mighty flood,
  Then ’round the throne we’ll be singing,
  Glory and praise to God.
  Refrain

  Glory, glory to God!
  Thus will the ransomed sing;
  Glory, glory to God,
  The everlasting King!
  Praise Him, alleluia!
  To that eternal sphere
  We are waiting
  For our translating;
  The time is near.

  In those bright mansions supernal,
  Death cannot enter there;
  Ages on ages eternal
  His likeness we shall bear.
  There will the once brokenhearted
  Rest in the spirit know;
  Sorrow forever departed,
  Gladness shall overflow.

  Refrain

  Sighing forever is ended,
  Foes shall oppress no more;
  Voices in worship are blended
  To Him Whom all adore.
  Bathed in the light soft and tender,
  Sealed for eternity,
  Praise to the Lamb we will render—
  Worthy of praise is He.

  Refrain

  Beautiful, wonderful story!
  Jesus Himself the Light;
  There in the kingdom of glory
  Never shall fall the night.
  Now I am singing of heaven,
  While here I wage the strife;
  Then will the victors be given
  Crowns of eternal life.

  Refrainhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/eternal_ruler_of_the_ceaseless_round.php
Eternal Ruler of the ceaseless round
  Of circling planets singing on their way,
  Guide of the nations from the night profound
  Into the glory of the perfect day,
  Rule in our hearts, that we may ever be
  Guided and strengthened and upheld by Thee.

  We are of Thee, the children of Thy love,
  The brothers of Thy well belovèd Son;
  Descend, O Holy Spirit, like a dove
  Into our hearts, that we may be as one;
  As one with Thee, to Whom we ever tend;
  As one with Him our Brother and our Friend.

  We would be one in hatred of all wrong,
  One in our love of all things sweet and fair;
  One with the joy that breaketh into song,
  One with the grief that trembleth into prayer,
  One in the power that makes Thy children free
  To follow truth, and thus to follow Thee.

  O clothe us with Thy heavenly armor, Lord,
  Thy trusty shield, Thy sword of love divine;
  Our inspiration be Thy constant Word;
  We ask no victories that are not Thine;
  Give or withhold, let pain or pleasure be,
  Enough to know that we are serving Thee.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/eternal_son_eternal_love.php
Eternal Son, eternal Love,
  Take to Thyself Thy mighty power;
  Let all earth’s sons Thy mercy prove;
  Let all Thy saving grace adore.

  The triumphs of Thy love display;
  In every heart reign Thou alone;
  Till all Thy foes confess Thy sway,
  And glory ends what grace began.

  Spirit of grace with health and power,
  Fountain of light and love below,
  Abroad Thy healing influence shower,
  O’er all the nations let it flow.

  Inflame our hearts with perfect love;
  In us the work of faith fulfill,
  So not Heav’n’s host shall swifter move
  Than we on earth, to do Thy will.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/eternal_source_of_every_joy.php
1. Eternal Source of Every Joy
  Well may Thy praise our lips employ,
  While in Thy temple we appear
  To hail Thee Sov'reign of the year.

  2. Wide as the wheels of nature roll
  Thy hand supports and guides the whole;
  The sun is taught by thee to rise,
  And darkness when to veil the skies.

  3. The flow'ry spring at thy command
  Perfumes the air and paints the land;
  The summer rays with vigor shine
  To raise the corn and cheer the vine.

  4. Thy hand, in autumn, richly pours
  Through all our coasts redundant stores;
  And winters, softened by thy care
  No more the face of horror wear.

  5. Seasons and months, and weeks and days,
  Demand successive songs of praise;
  And be the grateful homage paid,
  With morning light and ev'ning shade.

  6. Here in thy house let incense rise,
  And sweet devotion bless our eyes
  Till to those lofty heights we soar,
  Where days and years revolve no more.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/eternal_spirit_of_the_living_christ.php
Eternal Spirit of the living Christ,
  I know not how to ask or what to say;
  I only know my need, as deep as life,
  and only you can teach me how to pray.

  Come, pray in me the prayer I need this day;
  help me to see your purpose and your will 
  where I have failed, what I have done amiss;
  held in forgiving love, let me be still.

  Come with the strength I lack, the vision clear
  of neighbor's need, of all humanity;
  fulfilment of my life in love outpoured;
  my life in you, O Christ; your love in me.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/eternal_spirit_praise_we_bring.php
Eternal Spirit! Praise we bring—
  The wonders of Thy grace to sing;
  Thy pow'r conveys our blessings down
  From God the Father and the Son.

  Enlightened by Thy heav'nly ray,
  Our shades and darkness turn to day;
  Thine inward teachings make us view
  Our danger and our refuge, too.

  Thy pow'r and glory work within,
  And break the chains of reigning sin;
  Do our imperious lusts subdue,
  And form our wretched hearts anew.

  The troubled conscience knows Thy voice,
  Thy cheering words our hearts rejoice;
  At Thy blest Word life's storms are calm,
  And troubled minds find heav'nly balm. https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/eternal_spirit_we_confess.php
Eternal Spirit! we confess
  And sing the wonders of Thy grace
  Thy power conveys our blessings down
  From God the Father and the Son.

  Enlightened by Thine heav’nly ray,
  Our shades and darkness turn to day;
  Thine inward teachings make us know
  Our danger and our refuge too.

  Thy power and glory work within,
  And break the chains of reigning sin;
  Do our imperious lusts subdue,
  And form our wretched hearts anew.

  The troubled conscience knows Thy voice,
  Thy cheering words awake our joys;
  Thy words allay the stormy wind,
  And calm the surges of the mind.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/eternal_wisdom_thee_we_praise.php

Eternal Wisdom! Thee we praise,
Thee the creation sings,
With Thy loved Name, rocks, hills, and seas,
And Heaven’s high palace rings.

Thy hand, how wide it spreads the sky!
How glorious to behold!
Tinged with a blue of heavenly dye,
And starred with sparkling gold.

There Thou hast bid the globes of light
Their endless circles run;
There the pale planet rules the night,
The day obeys the sun.

If down I turn my wondering eyes
On clouds and storms below,
Those under-regions of the skies
Thy numerous glories show.

The noisy winds stand ready there
Thy orders to obey;
With sounding wings they sweep the air,
To make Thy chariot way.

There, like a trumpet loud and strong,
Thy thunder shakes our coast,
While the red lightnings wave along,
The banners of Thy host.

On the thin air, without a prop,
Hang fruitful showers around;
At Thy command they sink, and drop
Their fatness on the ground.

Lo! here Thy wondrous skill arrays
The earth in cheerful green;
A thousand herbs Thy art displays,
A thousand flowers between.

There, the rough mountains of the deep
Obey Thy strong command,
Thy breath can raise the billows steep,
Or sink them to the sand.

Thy glories blaze all nature round,
And strike the wondering sight
Through skies, and seas, and solid ground,
With terror and delight.

Infinite strength and equal skill
Shine through Thy works abroad.
Our souls with vast amazement fill.
And speak the builder God.

But the mild glories of Thy grace
Our softer passions move;
Pity divine in Jesu’s face
We see, adore, and love.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/eternally_yours.php



Lord my life You know clearly seeing where I need to grow

As You work in me cleansing all of my impurities


Lord I thank You for loving me just as I am

Though I'm weak by myself in Your strength I will stand

Your grace is sufficient for me..... eternally Your's

You're all I need and it's all I can do (eternally Your's)

To surrender my will in submission to You (eternally Your's)

Your grace is sufficient for me ..... eternally Your's


As I learn from You, Jesus, patiently You lead me through

Though I often fail, stumbling, You assure Your love prevail
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/eternity.php

Deep and grand in tones sublime,
Hear the passing bells of time,
Ring the dirge of moments dead,
Golden hours whose joys are fled—
Still those bells of time we hear,
Tolling, tolling: Hark! the word:
Refrain

Eternity!
Eternity!
Eternity!

In the rosy morning fair,
In the sultry noonday glare,
In the dewy evening bright,
In the silent hush of night—
Still those bells of time we hear,
Tolling, tolling, loud and clear:

Refrain

When with breaking heart we bend,
O’er a tried and faithful friend,
When the parting hour draws nigh,
And we catch the last “goodbye"—
Still those bells of time we hear,
Tolling, tolling, loud and clear:

Refrain

Precious word! if safe we stand
On the Christian’s borderland
Trusting Him, Whose loving smile
Lights and cheers us all the while—
Bells of time with joy we hear,
Tolling, tolling, sweet and clear:

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/eternity_gates.php

Oh, the clanging bells of Time!
Night and day they never cease;
We are wearied with their chime,
For they do not bring us peace;
And we hush our breath to hear,
And we strain our eyes to see
If thy shores are drawing near,
Eternity! Eternity!

Oh, the clanging bells of Time!
Now their changes rise and fall,
But in under tone sublime,
Sounding clearly through them all,
Is a voice that must be heard,
As our moments onward flee,
And it speaketh, aye, one word,
Eternity! Eternity!

Oh, the clanging bells of Time!
To their voices, loud and low,
In a long, unresting line
We are marching to and fro;
And we yearn for sight or sound,
Of the life that is to be,
For thy breath doth wrap us round,
Eternity! Eternity!

Oh, the clanging bells of Time!
Soon their notes will all be dumb,
And in joy and peace sublime,
We shall feel the silence come;
And our souls their thirst will slake,
And our eyes the King will see,
When thy glorious morn shall break,
Eternity! Eternity!
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/eternity_has_begun.php

Most any day, a sound will be made
That's never been heard before.
And when it's made, it will burst open the grave
Of everyone that went to sleep, in the lone.



And those that remain, in a moment will be changed.
With the brightness of heaven all around.
There'll be praise, there'll be singing
Heaven's bells will be ringing.
When that cloud starts coming down.



(Chorus) 
On this cloud there'll be our savior,
King of Kings, Lord of Lords, God's son.
Rising up his church, to join him.
Oh Hallelujah, eternity has begun.



Now when his glorious church, leaves a simple world
And goes home to the place he's prepared.
Fire and brimstone will reign, on everything that
remains
And the fire will fill the very air.


Oh but those who are saved, will have done left their
graves.
Glorified, robed in white, gone home.
Where we'll praise him forever, in a land where night
comes never.
When his glorious church goes home.


(To Chorus)

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/eve_of_communion.php

Tomorrow morn, O joy all words transcending,
Our God will come in eucharistic guise,
Our hearts with His in sweet communion blending,
Will raptured taste the bliss of Paradise.

Oh Mother loved, our cold hearts prepare,
Thy Jesus seeks to make His dwelling there;
With virtue bright thy children's hearts adorn,
For in their depths He'll rest tomorrow morn,
For in their depths He'll rest tomorrow morn.

Now fading fast day's briliant rays declining,
Tell that the morn, the day of love is near,
That soon the Sun of Justice brightly shining
In mercy veiled will to our souls appear.

Oh Mother loved, our cold hearts prepare,
Thy Jesus seeks to make His dwelling there;
With virtue bright thy children's hearts adorn,
For in their depths He'll rest tomorrow morn,
For in their depths He'll rest tomorrow morn.

Another morn will come, too sacred seeming,
When we may say farewell to mortal strife;
Haste, Haste, that dawn, now in the future gleaming,
The morn that leads us to eternal life.

Oh Mother loved, our cold hearts prepare,
Thy Jesus seeks to make His dwelling there;
With virtue bright thy children's hearts adorn,
For in their depths He'll rest tomorrow morn,
For in their depths He'll rest tomorrow morn.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/even_me.php

Lord, I hear of showers of blessing,
Thou art scattering full and free;
Showers the thirsty land refreshing;
Let some drops now fall on me;
Even me, even me,
Let some drops now fall on me.

Pass me not, O God, my Father,
Sinful though my heart may be;
Thou mightst leave me, but the rather;
Let Thy mercy light on me;
Even me, even me,
Let Thy mercy light on me.

Pass me not, O gracious Savior,
Let me live and cling to Thee;
I am longing for Thy favor;
Whilst Thou’rt calling, O call me;
Even me, even me,
Whilst Thou’rt calling, O call me.

Pass me not, O mighty Spirit!
Thou canst make the blind to see;
Witnesser of Jesus’ merit,
Speak the Word of power to me;
Even me, even me,
Speak the Word of power to me.

Have I been in sin long sleeping,
Long been slighting, grieving Thee?
Has the world my heart been keeping?
O forgive and rescue me;
Even me, even me,
O forgive and rescue me.

Love of God, so pure and changeless,
Blood of Christ, so rich and free;
Grace of God, so strong and boundless
Magnify them all in me;
Even me, even me,
Magnify them all in me.

Pass me not; but pardon bringing,
Bind my heart, O Lord, to Thee;
Whilst the streams of life are springing,
Blessing others, O bless me;
Even me, even me,
Blessing others, O bless me.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/evening_and_morning.php

Evening and morning, sunset and dawning,
Wealth, peace and gladness, comfort in sadness,
These are Thy works; all the glory be Thine!
Times without number, awake or in slumber,
Thine eye observes us, from danger preserves us,
Causing Thy mercy upon us to shine.

Father, O hear me, pardon and spare me;
Calm all my terrors, blot out my errors,
That by Thine eyes they may no more be scanned.
Order my goings, direct all my doings;
As it may please Thee retain or release me;
All I commit to Thy fatherly hand.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/evening_praise.php

Lord, the shades of night are gently soothing nature into rest,
And Thy love, to us unfolding, moves devotion in our breast,
Round the sacred fam’ly altar, we would close our pligrim days,
Make the evening vocal with our hymns of praise. 

Refrain:
One more day of life is gone, O gracious Father,
Thou hast sweetly kept us since we rose;
Now accept the evening praise we offer,
Ere in Thy arms we seek repose. 

Glory to the name of Jesus, for salvation all the day!
For Thy wall of love around us, keeping evil far away;
Humbly in Thy presence bowing, Father, we implore Thy grace,
That no sinful shadow hide Thy smiling face. 

Father, keep us ever holy, till our sun of life is set,
Like the twilight’s golden glory, may Thy presence linger yet;
Fold us in Thy arms of mercy, as we lay our bodies down,
In the final morning give us all a crown. 




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/evensong_is_hushed_in_silence.php

Evensong is hushed in silence,
and the hour of rest is nigh:
strengthen us for work tomorrow,
Son of Mary, God most high.
Thou who in the village workshop,
fashioning the yoke and plow,
didst eat bread by daily labor,
succor them that labor now.
Treading the path of lifelong toil,
and weary of pain and sin,
we look for the city with streets of gold,
where all is peace within.

How are we to reach that city,
whose delights no tongue may tell?
By the faith that looks to Jesus,
by a life of doing well:
sinful men and sinful women,
he will wash our sins away;
he will take us to the sheepfold,
whence no sheep can ever stray.
Treading the path of lifelong toil,
and weary of pain and sin,
we look for the city with streets of gold,
where all is peace within.

There the dear ones who have left us
we shall some day meet again;
there will be no bitter partings,
no more sorrow, death or pain.
Evensong has closed in silence,
and the hour of rest is nigh:
lighten thou our darkness, Jesus,
Son of Mary, God most high.
Treading the path of lifelong toil,
and weary of pain and sin,
we look for the city with streets of gold,
where all is peace within.




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/ever_keep_heaven_in_view.php

Pilgrim of Jesus, o’er life’s troubled sea,
Courage, and onward pursue;
A crown of rejoicing is waiting for thee,
Ever keep heaven in view. 

Refrain:
Ever keep heaven in view,
Ever keep heaven in view;
Courage, my brother, right onward pursue,
Ever keep heaven in view. 

Pilgrim of Jesus, what saddens thy brow?
Are not His promises true?
How needless thy sorrow, He’s bidding thee now,
Ever keep heaven in view. 

Pilgrim of Jesus, oh, lift up thy head,
Ask and thy strength He’ll renew;
And, while in the footprints of Jesus you tread,
Ever keep heaven in view. 

Pilgrim of Jesus, that Eden above
Long has been waiting for you;
And soon thou shalt reach thy fair mansion of love,
Ever keep heaven in view. 




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/ever_lead_me.php

Out on this dark world, Savior, am I,
Be Thou my helper, oh, hear my cry;
Thou art my portion, all is in Thee,
Oh, let Thy mighty hand ever lead me. 

Refrain:
Wilt Thou lead me by the hand? 

Hope of my heart, Lord, strength of my soul,
Guide Thou my footsteps and keep me whole;
My grace and fortress, Lord, Thou wilt be,
Oh, let Thy mighty hand ever lead me. 

Calm Thou the wild storm, clear up the way,
Keep me from falling, by night and day;
Trav’ling to glory, walking with Thee,
Oh, let Thy mighty hand ever lead me.




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/ever_so_gently.php

Ever so gently, your spirit calls to all who hear
Every so gently, the sound of your voice quiet yet clear

Day and night, to the ends of the earth
The skies pour forth speech
There's no place your voice isn't heard
Your patience astounds me

Your voice is the sweetest of sounds
It's the purest of life giving rain
Your voice is the calm in the storm
It's the whisper of love that remains

Ever so gently, I hear your voice pulling me near
Ever so gently, your word of life stronger than fear

If I turn away from your heart
Try to hide in my shame
You speak truth in love's patient way
Your gentleness breaks me

© 2000 Vineyard Songs Canada
CCLI #1596342



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/eveready.php

Words and music: Gary Miller © 1994 Anthony K. Music (ASCAP)

Lyrics: 

Eveready 

Any time, any place, any man of any race
Mighty God, amazing grace
Eveready 

Anything, anywhere, any problem, any care
Mighty God answers prayer
Eveready 

Any size, any shape, any address, any space
Might God honors faith 

Chorus 1:
He's ready with His power and love (power and love)
He's ready here and from above (from above)
He's ready when you call His name (call His name)
He's ready and He's still the same
Ever ever eveready 

Any sin, any crime, anyone who's crossed the line
Mighty God, amazing grace
Eveready (ever) 

Any task, any call, any challenge great or small
Mighty God answers prayer
Eveready 

Any truth we believe, any miracle we need
Mighty God honors faith
Eveready 

Chorus 1:
He's ready with His power and love (He's eveready)
He's ready here and from above
He's ready when you call His name (He's eveready)
He's ready and He's still the same
Ever ever eveready 

Any time, any place, any man of any race
Might God, amazing grace
Eveready (ever) 

Anything, anywhere, any problem, any care
Mighty God answers prayer
Eveready 

He's never very far away
He'll stand beside you night and day
He'll find you when you've lost your way
His love is here to stay 

Any sin, any crime, anyone who's crossed the line
Mighty God, amazing grace
Eveready (ever) 

Any thing, any where, any problem, any care
Mighty God answers prayer
Eveready (eveready) 

Any truth we believe, any miracle we need
Mighty God honors faith
Eveready (ever) 

Any size, any shape, any address, any space (eveready, eveready)
Might God honors faith (eveready)
Eveready



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/everlasting.php

From everlasting, to everlasting, you are God
From everlasting, to everlasting, you are God

In holiness you stand secure through culture's shifting sands
Unchanged by all the vanities of man
And as the nations rise and fall your sovereignty remains
You are, you are, you are the one true God

From everlasting, to everlasting, you are God
From everlasting, to everlasting, you are God

In faithfulness your love extends through times of turbulence

Adopting those who call upon your name
And every generation joins in songs of grateful praise
You are, you are, you are the one true God

From everlasting, to everlasting, you are God
From everlasting, to everlasting, you are God

Eternal, immortal, invisible, God
Eternal, immortal, invisible, God

© 2004 Integrity's Hosanna! M


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/everlasting_grace.php

Never let me stray from the truth of cavalry.

And let not my heart forget, Your sacrifice of love.

Like an overflowing river is the life You give to me.

I want to re - mem - ber, 

Help me re - mem - ber.


It's Your everlasting grace,

It's Your never failing love,

By the power of Your precious blood

I am changed, I am changed. 



And I stand before Your throne,
As one who bears Your name,
Forgiven and redeemed,
And cleansed from all my shame.
And the glory of Your presence,
Is the life You give to me.
I want to remember, Help me remember.





https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/everlasting_joy.php

Can the spirit of a mortal
Live beyond the reach of trouble?
Knowing not a painful struggle,
Ever joyful in the Lord? 

Refrain:
Glory to my Savior’s name!
Walking on His holy plane
Nothing can my peace disturb,
Free and happy as a bird,
Singing joyful praise evermore. 

He who is our great salvation,
And our high and strong munition
Is to us a full fruition
Of His peace and endless joy. 

I no trouble and no sorrow
See today, nor will I borrow
Gloomy visions for the morrow;
In my Jesus all is bright. 

To my soul all grace is given,
And all gloom afar is driven,
Walking in the light of heaven,
All is everlasting peace. 

Jesus bids be joyful ever;
He Himself, the wondrous Giver,
Flows within a constant river,
And my spirit must rejoice.





https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/everlasting_life.php

“Everlasting life!" is the promise giv’n unto them
Who love the Savior dear.
“Everlasting life!" and a home in Heav’n,
If you will believe His Name.
Refrain

Then believe Him! O receive Him!
Blessèd Savior, kingly favor.
Give Him ever best endeavor,
For with Him is everlasting life!

“Everlasting life!" shout it far and wide,
Blessèd tidings of salvation free.
“Everlasting life!" thro’ His blood applied,
To the sinner in his woe.

Refrain

“Everlasting life!" there is naught to do but to take
The words He gives you now.
“Everlasting life!" precious gift for you,
Thro’ the Savior crucified.

Refrain





https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/evermore.php

With all my heart I'll say
I'm living for your name
With all to give you praise
I'm living for your glory, Lord

Lost for words with all to say
Lord you take my breath away
Still my soul my soul cries out
For you are holy
And as I look upon your name
Circumstances fade away
Now your glory steals my heart
For you are holy, you are holy
You are holy, Lord

Evermore my heart, my heart will say
Above all, I live for your glory
Even if my world falls I will say
Above all, I live for your glory

© 2003 Joel Houston/Hillsongs Publishing
adm. in the US & Canada by Integrity's Hosanna! Music
CCLI #1596342

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/every_breath_that_i_take.php

Every breath that I take says I love you,
and every beat of my heart says I'm Yours.
Every step that I take says I need You
and I will bless Your holy name.

CHORUS:
You are my Redeemer,
You're the reason that I live.
Yes and You are my Salvation,
and I will bless Your holy name

Every day that goes by shows Your mercy,
and every gift that you give shows You care.
Every song that I sing says You're worthy
and I will bless Your holy name.

©1982 Mercy / Vineyard Publishing 
Words and Music by Eddie Espinosa

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/every_bridge_is_burned_behind_me.php

Since I started out to find Thee,
Since I to the cross did flee,
Every bridge is burned behind me;
I will never turn from Thee.
Refrain

Strengthen all the ties that bind me
Closer, closer, Lord to Thee,
Every bridge is burned behind me;
Thine I evermore will be.

Thou didst hear my plea so kindly;
Thou didst grant me so much grace,
Every bridge is burned behind me;
I will ne’er my steps retrace.

Refrain

Cares of life perplex and grind me,
Yet I keep the narrow way.
Every bridge is burned behind me;
I from Thee will never stray.

Refrain

All in All I ever find Thee,
Savior, Lover, Brother, Friend,
Every bridge is burned behind me;
I will serve Thee to the end.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/every_day_i_will_bless_thee.php

My Savior’s praises I will sing,
And all His love express;
Whose mercies each returning day
Proclaim His faithfulness.
Refrain

“Every day will I bless Thee!
Every day will I bless Thee!
And I will praise, will praise Thy Name
For ever and ever!"

Redeemed by His almighty power,
My Savior and my King;
My confidence in Him I place,
To Him my soul would cling.

Refrain

On Thee alone, my Savior, God,
My steadfast hopes depend;
And to Thy holy will my soul
Submissively would bend.

Refrain

O grant Thy Holy Spirit’s grace,
And aid my feeble powers,
That gladly I may follow Thee
Thro’ all my future hours.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/every_hour_for_jesus.php

Every hour for Jesus! shall my motto be,
There is plenty of work we may do;
We may all keep busy till the Lord we see,
Till He comes for His faithful few. 

Refrain:
Every hour for the Lord,
Every hour for the Lord let us spend;
Every hour for Jesus till He comes again,
When the labor of life shall end. 

Every hour for Jesus! We must work and pray,
We should never be slothful or tire;
For the time is coming, so His Word doth say,
When our work shall be tried by fire. 

Every hour for Jesus! and whate’er I do,
I must have His approval on me;
If I do heart service with the Lord in view,
He will bless me and keep me free. 

Every hour for Jesus! There is work for all,
Spend your time in His service alone;
Be ye ready, waiting for His every call,
Soon He’ll say, “ ’Tis enough, come home." 
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/every_hour_of_the_passing_day.php

Every hour of the passing day
Let me labor, Lord, for Thee;
While one soul in the darkness roams,
Let me never idle be. 

Refrain:
Every hour, every day,
Let me do some deed of love;
Every hour, every day,
Point some soul to the world above. 

Every hour of the passing day
Let me sow some precious seed;
Lift some load from a fainting soul,
Help some suff’ring one in need. 

Every hour of the passing day
Let me breathe Thy name in prayer;
Trusting in Thy grace divine,
Let me in Thy glory share. 

Every hour of the passing day
Let me drink at the fountain deep;
Drink from that exhaustless stream
Grace and pow’r my soul to keep. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/every_morning_mercies_new.php

Every morning mercies new

Fall as fresh as morning dew;
Every morning let us pay
Tribute with the early day:
For Thy mercies, Lord, are sure;
Thy compassion doth endure.

Still the greatness of Thy love
Daily doth our sins remove;
Daily, far as east from west,
Lifts the burden from the breast;
Gives unbought to those who pray
Strength to stand in evil day.

Let our prayers each morn prevail,
That these gifts may never fail;
And, as we confess the sin
And the tempter’s power within,
Every morning, for the strife,
Feed us with the Bread of Life.

As the morning light returns,
As the sun with splendor burns,
Teach us still to turn to Thee,
Ever blessèd Trinity,
With our hands our hearts to raise,
In unfailing prayer and praise.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/every_morning_the_red_sun.php

Every morning the red sun

Rises warm and bright;
But the evening cometh on,
And the dark, cold night.
There’s a bright land far away,
Where ’tis never-ending day.

Every spring the sweet young flowers
Open bright and gay,
Till the chilly autumn hours
Wither them away.
There’s a land we have not seen,
Where the trees are always green.

Little birds sing songs of praise
All the summer long,
But in colder, shorter days
They forget their song.
There’s a place where angels sing
Ceaseless praises to their King.

Christ our Lord is ever near
Those who follow Him;
But we cannot see Him here,
For our eyes are dim;
There is a most happy place,
Where men always see His face.

Who shall go to that bright land?
All who do the right:
Holy children there shall stand
In their robes of white;
For that Heav’n, so bright and blest,
Is our everlasting rest.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/every_move_i_make.php

Every move I make, I make in you
You make me move, Jesus
Every breath I take, I breathe in you
Every step I take, I take in you

You are my way, Jesus

Every breath I take, I breathe in You
Waves of mercy, waves of grace 
Everywhere I look I see your face
Your love has captured me

Oh my God, this love, how can it be?


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/every_time.php

Words and Music: Philip Organ © 1994 Philip Organ


Lyrics:

Everytime I kneel to pray I open up my heart to my Lord
(Everytime I kneel to pray I open up my heart to my Lord)
Everytime I close my eyes I feel the sweet embrace of my Lord
(Everytime I close my eyes I feel the sweet embrace of my Lord)

Chorus 1:
I don't know why so many things seem to get in the way of seeing my God's glory
But I try everyday to see and thank Him for all the things He's given me

Everytime I see a child I see the gentleness of my Lord
(Everytime I see a child I see the gentleness of my Lord)
Everytime I watch a storm I know the awesome power of my Lord
(Everytime I watch a storm I know the awesome power of my Lord)

Chorus 2:
I don't know why (I don't know why) so many things seem to get in the way of 
seeing my God's glory (seeing my God's glory)
But I try everyday to see and thank Him for all the things He's given me

Everytime I see a cross!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/every_time_i_feel_the_spirit.php

          Up on the mountains my Lord spoke;
          Out of His mouth came fire and smoke.
          Looked all around me, it looked so fine;
          I asked the Lord could it be mine.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/everybody_needs_jesus.php

Words and Music: Gary Miller © 1991 Anthony K. Music (ASCAP)

Lyrics:

Chorus 1:
Everybody needs Jesus
Everybody in the whole wide world
Everybody needs Jesus
Everybody has a right to know

Red China has a right to know
They're needing Jesus down in Mexico
San Juan, Puerto Rico
Zimbabwe and the Ivory Coast

Chorus 2:
Everybody needs Jesus (everybody needs Jesus)
Everybody in the whole wide world (everybody in the whole wide world)
Everybody needs Jesus (Jesus)
Everybody has a right to know

Prince Charles has a right to know
Moammar and Fidel Castro
Starving people in Nigeria
The rich and famous out in Hollywood

Chorus 3:
Everybody needs Jesus
Every single person in the whole wide world
Everybody needs Jesus
Everybody has a right to know

Bridge:
Just a little more faith in the Father (little more love)
Just a little more love of the Lord (little more hope)
Just a little more hope in the Spirit (little more time)
Just a little more time

Repeat Chorus 2 (with "everybody echo")

Little children have a right to know
Their hearts need Jesus as their bodies grow
Moms and dads have a need to show
The love of Jesus everywhere they go

Repeat Chorus 1 (with "everybody" echo)

Repeat Bridge
Just a little more time
Just a little more time

Repeat Chorus 2 (with "they need Jesus" echo)

They need Jesus...

Repeat Chorus 1 (with "they need Jesus" echo)

Everybody has a right to know
Everybody needs Him
Everybody has a right to know
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/everybody_needs_love.php

Words and music: Brian McSweeney © 1997 Star Struck Music / Forefront (ASCAP)

Lyrics:

I think I drove by you just yesterday
I think you were wearing
The same thing you are today
I don’t believe

Everyone watches but they’d never show
The pain that they’re feeling
And sometimes you just won’t let go
We all need to see you and me

Chorus:
‘Cause everybody needs love
Everybody needs love (we all need love)
‘Cause everybody needs love
Everybody needs love (we all need love)

Some say we’re different, I know we’re the same
We both need the sunshine
And I know we both need the rain
It helps me to see you and me

Repeat Chorus

Bridge:
Ooo, so many lives (so many lives) searching to find out what love is
But searching is all that they’ll find
This is the love (this is the love) Jesus would give up his life and
Carry a cross that was mine

(We all need love)

Repeat Chorus

We all need love
We (we all) all need love
We (we all) all need love
We (we all) all need lovehttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/everybody_praise.php

Words and music: Keith Lancaster and Randy Hatchett © 1989 by Anthony K. Music 
(ASCAP) 

Lyrics:

Verse 1:
Everybody praise the name of Jesus
Everybody worship the king
Lifting up our praise to overflowing
Lauding our Redeemer as we sing
Meaning every single word that we say
Let's declare how love found a way
Now the music of our heart is plain
Never tire of hearing it again

Counter to lead in Verse 1 (Rodney Britt):
Everybody praise His Name
Everybody worship the King
Lifting up our hearts in praise
Lifting up the Lord as we sing
Meaning every word that we say
Let's declare how love found a way
Now the message proclaims
Everybody sing it again

Counter to lead in Verse 1 (Keith Lancaster):
Everybody praise His Name
Lifting Him up as we sing
Lift it up until it overflows
Lifting Him up as we sing
Meaning every word we say
Let's declare love found a way
Now the message of my heart is plain
So let's all sing it again

Chorus:
Everybody praise his name
Sing hallelujah to the King of Kings
He will never leave us
He remains the same
Everybody praise his name

Verse 2:
Everybody praise the name of Jesus
Everybody worship the king
Lifting up our praise to overflowing
Lauding our Redeemer as we sing
Meaning every single word that we say
Let's declare how love found a way
Now the music of our heart is plain
Never tire of hearing it again

Counter to lead in Verse 2 (Rodney Britt):
Everybody praise His Name
Everybody worship the King
Lifting up our hearts in praise
Lifting up the Lord as we sing
Meaning every word that we say
Let's declare how love found a way
Now you know the message proclaims
Everybody sing it again

Counter to lead in Verse 2 (Keith Lancaster):
Everybody praise His Name
Lift your voice up to the King
Lift it up until it overflows
Lifting Him up as we sing
Meaning every word we say
Let's declare love a way
Now the message of our heart is plain
So let's all sing it again

Repeat Chorus (x2)

Everybody praise his namehttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/everybody_said.php

Words and music: Keith Lancaster © 1990 Anthony K. Music (ASCAP) 

Lyrics: 

Chorus:
Everybody said that anybody could do
The important things somebody should do
Everybody knows that anybody could do
All the good things that nobody did 

Well the preacher came to me and said what I ought to do
If I wanted to make my religion true
He'd do it himself but he really didn't have the time 
He said that the duty was mine 

Repeat Chorus (x2) 

Well the deacon came by and said give me a hand
If you want to be going to the promised land
Here is something that I don't have time to do
So I better give it to you 

Repeat Chorus (x2) 

Well I'm too busy so I tell everybody
The work's got to get done by somebody
It could be done by anybody
But nobody, nobody, nobody did 

Repeat Chorus (x2) 

All the good things that nobody did (x2) 
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/everybody_talkin_bout_heaven.php

Words and music: George Pendergrass and John Green © 1993 Anthony K. Music 
(ASCAP) / Clifty Music (BMI)

Lyrics:

Chorus:
Everybody talkin' 'bout heav'n that ain't goin' there
Everybody talkin' 'bout heav'n that ain't goin'
Everybody talkin' 'bout heav'n that ain't goin' there
Oh my Lord

Repeat Chorus (x2)

Well I read about the streets of gold
And I read about the throne
Not everybody callin' "Lord, Lord"
Is gonna see that heavenly home

Repeat Chorus

Additive Parts:
1 - But those who do the will of my God will enter heaven
2 - If you wanna go to heaven, you gotta do more than talk about it
3 - Oh heaven, to heaven, to heaven
4 - If you wanna go to heaven, to heaven, to heaven
5 - Heaven, I wanna go to heaven

Repeat ad lib

There will come a day
When we will all stand before the throne
On that day, some will say
"Did we not prophesy in your name?"
And they'll say:
"We drove out demons in your name"
I know some will say:
"We performed many miracles in your name"
Some will say
"So many works we've done in your name"

Then the Lord will say:
"Depart from me, ye workers of iniquity
I never knew you"
That's why I know

Repeat Chorus (x2)

Oh my Lord
Oh my Lord
Oh my Lord
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/everybody_will_be_happy.php

Words and music: E.M. Bartlett

Lyrics: 

There's a happy land of promise over in the great beyond
Where the saved of earth shall soon the glory share
Where the souls of men shall enter and live on forever more
Everybody will be happy over there! 

Chorus:
(Everybody will be happy, will be happy over there)
Everybody will be happy
Will be happy over there
(We will shout and sing His praises through the never-ending ages)
We will shout and sing His praise
Everybody will be happy over there! 

There the ransomed of all ages will be singing 'round the throne
In that land where no one ever knows a care
And the Christians of all nations will join in the triumph song
Everybody will be happy over there 

Repeat Chorus 

We'll meet the one who saved us and who kept us by His grace
And who brought us to that land so bright and fair!
We will praise His name forever as we look upon His face
Everybody will be happy over there! 

Repeat Chorus (x2) 
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/everybodys_gonna_have_a_wonderful_time_up_there.php

Listen everybody cause I'm talking to you. 
Jesus is the only one to carry you through. 
Now you better get ready for I'm telling you why, 
Jesus is a coming from His throne on high. 
Many are weary and alone and sad, 
They're gonna wish they hadn't done the things they had, 
How're you gonna feel about the things He'll say 
on that judgement day. 


CHORUS: 
Everybody's gonna have religion in glory, 
Everbody's gonna be singing that story, 
Everybody's gonna have a wonderful time up there, 

(BASE) Oh, glory hallelujah! 

Brother, there's reckoning a coming in the morning, 
Better get you ready cause I'm giving you warning, 
Everbody's gonna have a wonderful time up there. 


MORE......


VERSE 2

Listen here my sister we're not leaving you out. 
You may not be a preacher but you sing and shout, 
Whats the use to worry if you've been redeemed 
cause Heavens even better than a miser dreamed.. 
Think about the trouble you could save some soul, 
Tell them what to do to reach the shining goal, 
surely you can show them how to find the Light, 
make the whole thing right. 

VERSE 3
When the tribulations seem to darken the way, 
Thats the time to get down on your knees and pray. 
Everybody gonna have their troubles too, 
Gotta be so careful bout the things we do. 
We're going down the valley, going one by one, 
Gonna be rewarded for the things we've done. 
When we get to heaven and the promised land, 
Then we'll understand. 

VERSE 4
Now get your Holy Bible in the back of the book, 
The book of Revelation thats the place you must look, 
If you understand it and you can if you try, 
Jesus is a comin from His throne on high. 
Readin in the Bible all the things that He said, 
Said He was a comin back to raise the dead, 
Are you gonna be among the chosen few, 
Will you make it through. 

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/everyday_everywhere_for_everyone.php

Words and music: Gary Miller © 1995 Anthony K. Music (ASCAP)

Lyrics: 
(Everyday, everyday, everyday, everyday)
(Everyday, everyday, everyday, everyday) 

Christmas day is coming, it's in the air (every day)
We all know what the calendars say (every day)
If it's the peace and hope and joy that you want to share (every day)
Then why not share it everyday (every, share it everyday) 

Chorus 1:
Something very special about this time of year
Lots of people happy busy spreadin' lots of hope and cheer
May the Lord make us all wise
I pray the Lord to open our eyes
And see that Christmas time is everyday, everywhere, for everyone 

(everyone, yeah, ooh everyone) 

We want a white Christmas the song we sing (everywhere)
And Santa lives way up in the north (everywhere)
To north and south and east and west his joy we bring (everywhere)
And share His love all over the world (every, share it everywhere, yeah) 

Repeat Chorus 1 

(everyone, ooh everyone) 

Universally (Universally) unified (unified)
Undivided (Undivided) you and I (you and I) 

Christmas is for kids that's what they say (everyone)
And brother I don't think that they're wrong (everyone)
And since we're all kids of God anyway (everyone)
I guess that Christmas is for everyone (every, Christmas is for everyone) 

Chorus 2:
Something very special about this time of year (something very special)
Lots of people happy busy spreadin' lots of hope and cheer (spreadin' lots of 
cheer)
May the Lord make us all wise (make us wise)
I pray the Lord to open our eyes (open our eyes)
And see that Christmas time is everyday, everywhere, for everyone
Christmas time is everyday, everywhere, for every…
Christmas time is everyday, everywhere, for everyone

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/everyone_should_be_quick_to_listen.php

Everyone should be quick to listen—hear now and heed—
Slow to speak, also slow to anger in word and deed.
Anger does not yield a life praised by the Lord,
So get rid of all sin and humbly accept God’s Word.

If you listen, but do not practice, you’ll go astray,
Like a man who looks in a mirror, then goes away.
You must keep looking; God’s Word will set you free.
Don’t forget what you’ve heard, but do it, and blessed you’ll be.

If you think you’re a model Christian, yet speak too free,
If your tongue has no rein, faith’s worthless; you’ve been deceived.
Here’s faith the Father accepts as pure and true:
Help the needy, keep from defilement in all you do.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/everything_good.php

Words and Music: Barry Jennings, Suzanne Jennings © 2002 Townsend and Warbucks 
Music (ASCAP)

Lyrics:

Chorus:
Everything good, everything bright
Everything holy, everything right
Everything worthy, all that I should
And all is well cause I’m gonna dwell on everything good

I’ve got a choice, I’ve got a plan
Gonna find the roses under the thorns whenever I can
I'm lookin’ for joy (lookin' for joy), lookin’ for love (lookin' for love)
Lookin’ for a little bit of heaven on earth shinin’ down from above (from above)

Repeat Chorus

I'm changin’ the scene (changin' the scene), I'm changin’ my ways (changin' my 
ways)
Tradin’ some gloomy doomy nights for a few more sunny days
It’s all in the heart (all in the heart), it’s all in the eyes (all in the eyes)
So here’s how I’m lookin’ at life, I’ve made up my mind

Repeat Chorus (x3)

Good, good, good, good
And all is well cause I’m gonna dwell on everything good
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/everything_i_do.php

If it weren't for you Lord I don't know where I'd be
I could fill the hours but never fill the need
I would still be searching, looking for the truth
But I've found a new life that only comes from you

CHORUS
Everything I do let it be in Your name
Let it be for Your glory let it be for You
Everything I say let it be in Your name 
Let it be to Your glory let it be for Your sake
Cause I wanna please you in everything I do

I want the world to see You when they look at me
and I want the world to hear You in every word I speak
so let my words be Your words and my actions too
So they'll find the new life that I have found in You

CHORUS
You filled up my empty heart
Give me the strength so that I can go on
You're the reason that my life has changed 
And that's why I say...

CHORUShttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/everything_is_beautiful.php

Words and Music by Ray Stevens
© 1970

Jesus loves the little children,
All the children of the world;
Red and yellow, black and white,
They are precious in His sight;
Jesus loves the little children of the world. 



Refrain
Everything is beautiful in its' own way,
Like a starry summer night
or a snow covered winter's day.
Everybody's beautiful in their own way,
Under God's heaven, the world's gonna find a way. 

There is none so blind as he who will not see.
We must not close our minds,
we must let our thoughts be free.
For every hour that passes by,
you know the world gets a little bit older.
It's time to realize that beauty lies
in the eyes of the beholder. 



Refrain
Everything is beautiful in its' own way,
Like a starry summer night
or a snow covered winter's day.
Everybody's beautiful in their own way,
Under God's heaven, the world's gonna find a way. 

We shouldn't care about the length of his hair
or the color of his skin.
Don't worry about what shows from without
but the loves that lives within.
We're gonna get it all together
And everything's gonna work out just fine.
Just take a little time to look on the good side
and straighten it out in your mind. 


Refrain
Everything is beautiful in its' own way,
Like a starry summer night
or a snow covered winter's day.
Everybody's beautiful in their own way,
Under God's heaven, the world's gonna find a way. 

Everything is beautiful in its' own way,
Like a starry summer night
or a snow covered winter's day.
Everybody's beautiful in their own way,
Under God's heaven, the world's gonna find a way.
Under God's heaven, the world's gonna find a way. 

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/everything_is_gonna_be_alright.php

Words and music: Gary Moyers and Duane Adams © 1993 Clifty Music (BMI)/Anthony 
K. Music (ASCAP)

Lyrics: 

All right now, all right now, all right now, all right now 

I'm feeling fine today. What else can I say?
I know all along through all the wrong
He's making me strong
When tears are not enough, when life seems too tough
Through the daily grind, if you're one step behind
Just give it some time 

'Cause there is one who loves me
Shown me good living
Constantly serving, Constantly giving 

Everything is gonna be all right
Everything is gonna be all right
Murphy said if it could go wrong it would
I kind of doubt that he was looking for the good
'Cause God said, everything is gonna be all right 

You've got your head held high (head held high)
But you're not sure why
Don't try to pretend, you'll only win
If he's living within
Without the light of day you can't see the way
So why all the pain? You worry in vain
His loss is your gain 

'Cause there is one who loves me
Shown me good living
Constantly serving, constantly giving 

Chorus:
Everything is gonna be all right (yes it is)
Everything is gonna be all right
Just keep in mind that He is working on your heart
Don't tell me you forgot who's been there
From the start
'Cause God said everything is gonna be all right 

Bridge:
He said it's gonna be okay
Just listen close to what He will say
He said it's gonna be okay
He'll lift you up if you kneel down to pray 

Repeat Chorus 

(Everything is gonna be all right)
Everything is gonna be all right (all right now, all right now, all right now, 
all right now)
Everything is gonna be all right 

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/everything_is_in_your_hands.php

Everything is in your hands
Everything is in your hands
Everything is in your hands, oh God


My past and my present
And things yet to come
My days are in your hands
Each and every one
I know you can handle
Any challenge that I face
You promised you'd be there
Every step that I take


There's nothing too big
That you aren't bigger
Remind us again Lord
That you are in control
We know you can handle
Any challenge that we face
You promised you'd be there
Every step that we take 



(ver. 2)

CHORUS:

Everything is in Your hands
Everything is in Your hands
Everything is in Your hands, oh God


My past and my present and things yet to come
My days are in Your hands, each and every one
I know You can handle any challenge that I face
You promised You'd be there every step that I take


There's nothing to big, that You aren't bigger
Remind us again Lord that You are in control
We know You can handle any challenge that we face
You promised You'd be there every step that we take
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/everything_we_need.php

Words and music: Keith Lancaster © 1993 Anthony K. Music (ASCAP)

Lyrics: 

His divine power has given us 
Everything, everything we need 
His divine power has given us 
Everything, everything we need 
For life and godliness 
Through our knowledge of Him 
Who called us 
By His own glory and goodness 
He was given everything for 
Live and godliness 
Through our knowledge of Him 
Who called us 
By His own glory and goodness 

Repeat 

His divine power has given us 
Everything, everything we need 
His divine power has given us 
Everything, everything we need 
For life 

Repeat 
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/everythings_fine.php

Chorus:
Everything's fine when you're taking the time to know Jesus (don't you wanna 
know Him)
Everything's fine when you're taking the time to know (Him) Him
The answers that you did not know (before you loved Him so)
Before you came to love Him so
(All become) All seem to come so clear (all become so clear)
Whenever my Lord is near
Everything's fine when you're taking the time to know Jesus (don't you wanna 
know Him)
Everything's fine when you're taking the time to know (Him) Him

Well, I used to worry and I used to fret
The world would get me so upset
It would make me weary and would make me frown
When it would tug and pull me down
But I was able to rise above
When Jesus pulled me by His love
I've been changed, forgiven, and He's so kind
He makes everything fine

Repeat Chorus

Well, I used to envy and I used to pout
The world had filled me up with doubt
It would make me jealous and would make me sad
When I was giving in to bad
But I was able to overcome
By all that Jesus Christ has done
He's done cleared my conscience and settled my mind
He says everything's fine

Everything's fine when you're taking the time to know Jesus (don't you wanna 
know Him)
Everything's fine when you're taking the time to know (Him) Him
Everything's, everything's, everything's fine
When I am making and taking the time
Everything's, everything's, everything's fine (everything's fine when you're 
taking the time to know)
Everything is fine, yeah


 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/everytime_i_feel_the_spirit.php

Up on the mountains my Lord spoke;
Out of His mouth came fire and smoke.
Looked all around me, it looked so fine;
I asked the Lord could it be mine.


Chorus:

Every time I feel the spirit
Movin’ in my heart I will pray.
Yes, every time I feel the spirit
Movin’ in my heart I will pray.


There ain’t but one train, running on this track
It runs to heaven and it runs right back
If I behave they will let me ride,
I’ll have a home there when I get inside.


Oh, I have sorrows and I have woe
And I have heartache here below.
But while God leads me I’ll never fear;
For I am sheltered by His care.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/exalt_him.php

Words and music: Jon Mark Hurley © 1996 Anthony K. Music (ASCAP)

Lyrics: 

Exalt the Lord our God
He is worthy to be praised
Exalt the Lord our God
He is worthy to be praised 

Chorus:
Exalt Him (for He is holy)
Exalt Him (for He is holy)
Exalt Him
And with your voices raised
Exalt Him (for He is holy)
Exalt Him (for He is holy)
Exalt Him
And worthy to be praised 

Repeat All 

He's worthy to be praised
He's worthy to be praised 






 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/exalt_the_lord_his_praise_proclaim.php

Exalt the Lord, His praise proclaim;
All ye His servants, praise His Name,
Who in the Lord’s house ever stand
And humbly serve at His command.
The Lord is good, His praise proclaim;
Since it is pleasant, praise His Name;
His people for His own He takes
And His peculiar treasure makes.

I know the Lord is high in state,
Above all gods our Lord is great;
The Lord performs what He decrees,
In heaven and earth, in depths and seas.
He makes the vapors to ascend
In clouds from earth’s remotest end;
The lightnings flash at His command,
He holds the tempest in His hand.

Exalt the Lord, His praise proclaim;
All ye His servants, praise His Name,
Who in the Lord’s house ever stand
And humbly serve at His command,
Forever praise and bless His Name,
And in the church His praise proclaim;
In Zion is His dwelling place;
Praise ye the Lord, show forth His grace.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/exalted_high_at_gods_right_hand.php

Exalted high at God’s right hand,
Nearer the throne than cherubs stand,
With glory crowned, in white array,
My wondering soul says, “Who are they?"

These are the saints beloved of God,
Washed are their robes in Jesus’ blood;
More spotless than the purest white,
They shine in uncreated light.

Brighter than angels, lo! they shine
Their glories great, and all divine;
Tell me their origin, and say
Their order what, and whence they came.

Through tribulation great they came;
They bore the cross, and scorned the shame;
Within the living temple blest,
In God they dwell, and on Him rest.

Hunger they ne’er shall feel again,
Nor burning thirst shall they sustain;
To wells of living waters led
By God, the Lamb, forever fed.

Unknown to mortal ears, they sing
The secret glories of their King;
Tell me the subject of their lays,
And whence their loud exalted praise.

Jesus, the Savior, is their theme;
They sing the wonders of His Name;
To Him ascribing power and grace,
Dominion and eternal praise.

“Amen" they cry to Him alone,
Who dares to fill His Father’s throne;
They give Him glory, and again
Repeat His praise, and say “Amen."



 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/excellent_spirit.php

I want to multiply what I have
To do more than what is required
To walk the extra mile
Then God will say to me
Worthy and profitable servant

CHORUS

Excellent spirit
Excellent work
To rise above the rest
Excellent servant
Excellent mind
Is what I’m longing for



 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/excuses.php

Chorus:
Excuses, Excuses
You hear them everyday
Now the devil he'll supply them if in church you stay away
When people come to worship God, the devil always loses
So to keep those folks away from church, he offers them excuses 
Well in the summer it's too hot
In the winter it's too cold
In the springtime when the weather's just right, you find some place else to go
Well it's up to the mountains or down to the beach or to visit some old friend
Or just stay home and kind relax and hope some of the kid folks start droppin' 
in
Well those church benches; they're too hard
And that song leader's way too loud
Well you know how nervous you get when you're sittin' in a great big crowd
Now the doctor told you to watch them crowds, they'll set you back
But you go to that ol' ball game 'cause they say it helps you to relax
Well a headache Sunday morning
And a backache Sunday night
But by work time Monday morning, you're feeling quite all right
Well one of the children has a cold, pneumonia do you suppose?
Why, the whole family has to stay home! (Just to blow that poor kid's nose) 

Repeat Chorus (x2) 

To keep those folks away from church, he offers them excuses! 




 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/expecting_more.php

We’ve come into your house 
With hearts wide open
We’ve come to you 
Expecting to see your power (x2)

You are my God
I will seek you 
My soul longs for you

Oh Lord, You know me
Better than I know myself
Oh Lord, I trust You
My heart is Yours


 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/extended_on_a_cursed_tree.php

Extended on a cursèd tree,
Besmeared with dust, and sweat, and blood,
See there, the King of Glory see!
Sinks and expires the Son of God.

Who, who, my Savior, this hath done?
Who could Thy sacred body wound?
No guilt Thy spotless heart hath known,
No guile hath in Thy lips been found.

I, I alone, have done the deed!
’Tis I Thy sacred flesh have torn;
My sins have caused Thee, Lord, to bleed,
Pointed the nail, and fixed the thorn.

The burden, for me to sustain
Too great, on Thee, my Lord, was laid;
To heal me, Thou hast borne my pain;
To bless me, Thou a curse wast made.

In the devouring lion’s teeth,
Torn, and forsook of all, I lay;
Thou sprang’st into the jaws of death,
From death to save the helpless prey.

Savior, how shall I proclaim?
How pay the mighty debt I owe?
Let all I have, and all I am,
Ceaseless to all Thy glory show.

Too much to Thee I cannot give;
Too much I cannot do for Thee;
Let all Thy love, and all Thy grief,
Graven on my heart for ever be!

The meek, the still, the lowly mind,
O may I learn from Thee, my God,
And love, with softest pity joined,
For those that trample on Thy blood!

Still let Thy tears, Thy groans, Thy sighs,
O’erflow my eyes, and heave my breast,
Till loose from flesh and earth I rise,
And ever in Thy bosom rest.


 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/ezekiel_saw_de_wheel.php

Arrangement: Keith Lancaster © 1996 Anthony K. Music (ASCAP)


Lyrics: 

Ezekiel saw de wheel
Way in de middle o' de air
Ezekiel saw de wheel
In de middle o' de air 

Chorus:
Ezekiel saw de wheel (He saw that wheel)
Way in de middle o' de air
Ezekiel saw de wheel
In de middle of the air
Ezekiel saw de wheel (He saw that wheel)
Way in de middle o' de air
Ezekiel saw de wheel
In de middle of the air 

Some go to church for to sing and shout, don't ya know (in de middle of de air)
Some ought to go to get the devil out, don't ya know (in de middle of de air)
I'm workin' hard, tryin' to do what's right, don't ya know (in de middle of de 
air)
And I'll pray, the Lord, He'll help me win this fight, don't ya know (in de 
middle of de air) 

Repeat Chorus 

Well, ya better mind my brother how you walk on the cross, don't ya know (in de 
middle of de air)
Your foot might slip, and your soul get lost, don't ya know (in de middle of de 
air)
Well old Satan, he wears a club foot shoe, oh Lord in de middle of de air
If you don't mind it he'll slip it on you, don't ya know (in de middle of de 
air) 

Repeat Chorus 

Ezekial saw de wheel
He saw that wheel
In de middle o' de air https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/ezekiel_saw_the_wheel.php

Chorus:

Ezekiel saw the wheel
Way up in the middle of the air
Ezekiel saw the wheel
Way up in the middle of the air
And the little wheel run by faith
And the big wheel run by the grace of God
A wheel in a wheel
Way up in the middle of the air

Some go to church to sing and shout
Way in the middle of the air
Before six months they’ve shouted out
Way in the middle of the air

Chorus

Let me tell you what a hypocrite’ll do
Way in the middle of the air
He’ll talk about me, he’ll talk about you
Way in the middle of the air

Chorus

Don’t pray for things that you don’t need
Way in the middle of the air
The Lord don’t like no sin and greed
Way in the middle of the air

Chorus

There’s one thing sure that you can’t do
Way in the middle of the air
You can’t serve God and Satan too
Way in the middle of the air

Chorus

One of these days about twelve o’clock
Way in the middle of the air
This old world’s gonna reel and rock
Way in the middle of the air

Chorus
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/let_everything_that_has_breath.php

Let everything that, everything that
everything that has breath praise the Lord
(repeat)


Verse 1:

Praise you in the morning 
Praise you in the evening
Praise you when I'm young and when I'm old
Praise you when I'm laughing
Praise you when I'm grieving
Praise you every season of your soul
If we could see how much your worth
Your power your might your endless love
Then surely we would never cease to praise you

Verse 2:
Praise you when the heavens, joining with the angels
Praising you forever and a day
Praise you on the earth now, joining with creation
Calling all the nations to your praise
If they could see how much your worth
Your power your might your endless love
Then surely they would never cease to praise you
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/the_earth_and_the_fullness.php

The earth and the fullness with which it is stored,
The world and its dwellers belong to the Lord;
For He on the seas its foundations has laid,
And firm on the waters its pillars has stayed.

What man shall the hill of Jehovah ascend,
And who in the place of His presence attend?
The man of pure heart and of hands without stain,
Who swears not to falsehood nor loves what is vain.

That man ever blest of Jehovah shall live,
The God of salvation shall righteousness give;
For this is the people, yea, this is the race,
The Israel true that is seeking His face.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/the_earth_belongs_unto_the_lord.php

The earth belongs unto the Lord,
And all that it contains;
The world that is inhabited,
And all that there remains.
For the foundations thereof
He on the seas did lay,
And He hath it establishèd
Upon the floods to stay.

Who is the man that shall ascend
Into the hill of God?
Or who within His holy place
Shall have a firm abode?
Whose hands are clean, whose heart is pure,
And into vanity
Who hath not lifted up his soul,
Nor sworn deceitfully.

He from th’Eternal shall receive
The blessing him upon,
And righteousness, ev’n from the God
Of his salvation.
This is the generation
That after Him inquire,
O Jacob, who do seek Thy face
With their whole heart’s desire.

Ye gates, lift up your heads on high;
Ye doors, that last for aye,
Be lifted up, that so the King
Of glory enter may.
But who of glory is the King?
The mighty Lord is this;
Ev’n that same Lord, that great in might
And strong in battle is.


 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/the_earth_is_hushed_in_silence.php

The earth is hushed in silence,
Its cares now flee away,
Let all things bow in reverence,
On this the Lord’s own day.
Refrain

O praise and pray on this,
The Lord’s own day.

The bells are sweetly ringing,
Their clear toned voices say:
“Ye people, come and worship
On this, the Lord’s own day."

Refrain

Come, all ye thankful people;
Why should our hearts delay
To greet the Lord of Heaven
On this His holy day?

Refrain

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/the_earth_was_filled_with_peace_and_light.php

The earth was filled with peace and light,
When Christ arose;
The heavens trembled at the sight,
When Christ arose;
The sea rejoiced along the sands,
The vernal valleys clapped their hands,
The mountains sang, and all the lands,
When Christ arose.

The tomb was empty where He lay,
When Christ arose;
And angels rolled the stone away,
When Christ arose;
A sound of triumph thrilled the air,
The glorious tidings to declare,
And there was gladness ev’rywhere,
When Christ arose.

The soul of man was born anew,
When Christ arose;
The cross divine appeared in view,
When Christ arose;
A glorious light from heaven streamed,
And from the cross a radiance beamed,
For ev’ry spirit was redeemed,
When Christ arose.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/the_earth_o_lord_is_one_wide_field.php

The earth, O Lord, is one wide field
Of all Thy chosen seed;
The crop prepared its fruit to yield;
The laborers are few indeed.

We therefore come before Thee now
With fasting, and with prayer,
Beseeching of Thy love that Thou
Wouldst send more laborers there.

Not for our land alone we pray,
Though that above the rest;
The realms and islands far away,
O let them all be blest.

Endue the bishops of Thy flock
With wisdom and with grace,
Against false doctrine, like a rock,
To set the heart and face.

To all Thy priests Thy truth reveal,
And make Thy judgments clear;
Make Thou Thy deacons full of zeal,
And humble, and sincere.

And give their flocks a lowly mind
To hear and to obey;
That each and all may mercy find
At Thine appearing day.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/the_earth_with_all_that_dwell_therein.php

The earth, with all that dwell therein,
With all its wealth untold,
Belongs to God, Who founded it
Upon the seas of old.

What man shall stand before the Lord
On Zion’s holy hill?
The clean of hand, the pure of heart,
The just who does His will.

Lo, such are they that seek for God
And blest by Him they live
To them His perfect righteousness
The God of grace will give.

Who is this glorious King that comes?
To claim His sovereign right?
It is the Lord omnipotent
All conquering in His might.

Ye everlasting doors, give way,
Lift up your heads, ye gates!
For now, behold, to enter in
The King of Glory waits.

Who is this glorious King that comes
To claim His rightful throne?
The Lord of Hosts, He is the King
Of glory, God alone.

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/the_eastern_gate.php



I will meet you in the morning,
Just inside the Eastern Gate.
Then be ready, faithful pilgrim,
Lest with you it be too late.
Refrain

I will meet you, I will meet you
Just inside the Eastern Gate over there.
I will meet you, I will meet you,
I will meet you in the morning over there.

If you hasten off to glory,
Linger near the Eastern Gate,
For I’m coming in the morning;
So you’ll not have long to wait.

Refrain

Keep your lamps all trimmed and burning;
For the Bridegroom watch and wait.
He’ll be with us at the meeting
Just inside the Eastern Gate.

Refrain

O the joys of that glad meeting
With the saints who for us wait!
What a blessèd, happy meeting
Just inside the Eastern Gate!

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/the_eden_above.php



We shall meet in the Eden above,
In that beautiful land of the blest;
All our trials and pains will be o’er,
When we enter that mansion of rest.
In the beautiful, beautiful Eden above,
In the beautiful, beautiful Eden above,
All our trials and pains will be o’er,
When we enter that mansion of rest.

When we meet in the Eden above,
When we enter that blissful abode,
All the good who have passed on before,
We shall meet in the City of God.
In the beautiful, beautiful Eden above,
In the beautiful, beautiful Eden above,
All the good who have passed on before,
We shall meet in the City of God.

The saints of all ages are there,
The prophets and martyrs of old;
The children whose voices on earth are still,
Now sing in that city of gold.
In the beautiful, beautiful Eden above,
In the beautiful, beautiful Eden above,
The children whose voices on earth are still,
Now sing in that city of gold.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/the_end_is_not_yet.php



I have tried to count His blessings, and I fail to understand
Why the Lord should so richly reward;
Could I count the stars of heaven, add to them earth’s grains of sand,
Still His blessings are more, praise the Lord!
Refrain

And the end is not yet, praise the Lord,
And the end is not yet, praise the Lord;
Blessings new He’s still bestowing,
And my cup is overflowing,
And the end is not yet, praise the Lord!

Like an army I behold them pass before me in review,
O what joy doth the sight now afford!
Tho’ they may be long in passing, still they come, battalions new,
And the end is not yet, praise the Lord!

Refrain

Surely goodness, love and mercy have been mine along life’s way,
And my weak heart to strength is restored;
And my cup of joy and gladness keeps o’erflowing, day by day,
And the end is not yet, praise the Lord!

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/the_end_of_the_road.php



When I come to the end of the long, long road,
The shadows will flee away,
And I’ll stand in the glorious light of God,
Where dwelleth eternal day.
Refrain

When I come to the end, the end of the road,
To the land of eternity,
When I come to the end of life’s long road,
The face of my Lord I’ll see.

Looking back o’er the years that were hard and drear,
The hand of the Christ I’ll see;
While my heart will go forth with a song of praise,
Because of His love for me.

Refrain

When I come to the end of the long, long road,
And trials will all be past,
I shall look in the face of my dearest Friend,
Safe home in His Heav’n at last.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/the_ends_of_all_the_earth_shall_hear.php



The ends of all the earth shall hear
And turn unto the Lord in fear;
All kindreds of the earth shall own
And worship Him as God alone.
Refrain

All earth to Him her homage brings,
The Lord of lords, the King of kings.

For His the kingdom, His of right,
He rules the nations by His might;
All earth to Him her homage brings,
The Lord of lords, the King of kings.

Refrain

Both rich and poor, both bond and free
Shall worship Him on bended knee,
And children’s children shall proclaim
The glorious honor of His Name.

Refrain

The Lord’s unfailing righteousness
All generations shall confess,
From age to age shall all be taught
What wondrous works the Lord has wrought.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/the_eternal_gifts_of_christ_the_king.php



The eternal gifts of Christ the King,
The Apostles’ glorious deeds, we sing;
And while due hymns of praise we pay,
Our thankful hearts cast grief away.

The Church in these her princes boasts,
These victor chiefs of warriors hosts;
The soldiers of the heavenly hall,
The lights that rose on earth for all.

’Twas thus the yearning faith of saints,
The unconquered hope that never faints,
The love of Christ that knows not shame,
The prince of this world overcame.

In these the Father’s glory shone;
In these the will of God the Son;
In these exults the Holy Ghost;
Through these rejoice the heavenly host.

Redeemer, hear us of Thy love,
That, with this glorious band above,
Hereafter, of Thine endless grace,
Thy servants also may have place.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_e/the_everlasting_hymn.php

                            Holy, holy, holy;
                            Angel voices singing;
                            Holy, holy, holy,
                            Through high heaven ringing.
                            From that temple, pure and bright,
                            Bathed in streams of crystal light,
                            Hear the everlasting hymn,
                            Holy, holy, holy.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/a_few_more_watchings_weary.php

                                                                                    A few more marchings weary, then we値l gather home!
                                                                                    A few more storm clouds dreary, then we値l gather home!
                                                                                    A few more days the cross to bear,
                                                                                    And then with Christ a crown to wear;
                                                                                    A few more marchings weary, then we値l gather home!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/a_few_more_years_shall_roll.php



A few more marchings weary, then we値l gather home!
A few more storm clouds dreary, then we値l gather home!
A few more days the cross to bear,
And then with Christ a crown to wear;
A few more marchings weary, then we値l gather home!
Refrain

O弾r time痴 rapid river, soon we値l rest forever;
No more marchings weary when we gather home!

A few more nights of weeping, then we値l gather home!
A few more watches keeping, then we値l gather home!
A few more vict池ies over sin,
A few more sheaves to gather in,
A few more marchings weary, then we値l gather home!

Refrain

A few more sweet links broken, then we値l gather home!
A few more kind words spoken, then we値l gather home!
A few more partings on the strand,
And then away to Canaan痴 land:
A few more marchings weary, then we値l gather home!

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/friend_i_have_called_jesus.php

A friend I have called Jesus, Whose love is strong and true,
And never fails howe’er ’tis tried, no matter what I do;
I’ve sinned against this love of His, but when I knelt to pray,
Confessing all my guilt to Him, the sin clouds rolled away.
Refrain

It’s just like Jesus to roll the clouds away,
it’s just like Jesus to keep me day by day,
it’s just like Jesus all along the way,
It’s just like His great love.

Sometimes the clouds of trouble bedim the sky above,
I cannot see my Savior’s face, I doubt His wondrous love;
But He, from heaven’s mercy seat, beholding my despair,
In pity bursts the clouds between, and shows me He is there.

Refrain

When sorrow’s clouds o’ertake me, and break upon my head,
When life seems worse than useless, and I were better dead;
I take my grief to Jesus then, nor do I go in vain,
For heavenly hope He gives that cheers like sunshine after rain.

Refrain

O, I could sing forever of Jesus’ love divine,
Of all His care and tenderness for this poor life of mine;
His love is in and over all, and wind and waves obey,
When Jesus whispers “Peace, be still!" and rolls the clouds away.

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/face_to_face_with_christ_my_savior.php

Face to face with Christ, my Savior,
Face to face—what will it be,
When with rapture I behold Him,
Jesus Christ Who died for me?
Refrain

Face to face I shall behold Him,
Far beyond the starry sky;
Face to face in all His glory,
I shall see Him by and by!

Only faintly now I see Him,
With the darkened veil between,
But a blessèd day is coming,
When His glory shall be seen.

Refrain

What rejoicing in His presence,
When are banished grief and pain;
When the crooked ways are straightened,
And the dark things shall be plain.

Refrain

Face to face—oh, blissful moment!
Face to face—to see and know;
Face to face with my Redeemer,
Jesus Christ Who loves me so.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fade_fade_each_earthly_joy.php

Fade, fade, each earthly joy, Jesus is mine!
Break every tender tie, Jesus is mine!
Dark is the wilderness, Earth has no resting place,
Jesus alone can bless, Jesus is mine!

Tempt not my soul away, Jesus is mine!
Here would I ever stay, Jesus is mine!
Perishing things of clay, born but for one brief day,
Pass from my heart away, Jesus is mine!

Farewell, ye dreams of night, Jesus is mine!
Lost in this dawning bright, Jesus is mine!
All that my soul has tried left but a dismal void;
Jesus has satisfied, Jesus is mine!

Farewell, mortality, Jesus is mine!
Welcome, eternity, Jesus is mine!
Welcome, oh, loved and blest, welcome sweet scenes of rest,
Welcome, my Savior’s breast, Jesus is mine!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fain_would_i_lord_of_grace.php

Fain would I, Lord of grace,
With penitential tears
The record of my sins efface,
That in Thy book appears:

Fain would I journey hence,
In garb of stainless white,
And made by mine own penitence
Well pleasing in Thy sight.

Fond idle dream! the foe
But lures and fools my soul;
Not all my tears can peace bestow—
Thou only makest whole.

Hath ever sailor tossed,
Or sufferer racked in pain,
Within Thine anchorage been lost,
Or found Thy Gilead vain?

Maker and Hope of all!
Wounded and sick am I:
Great Healer, save me, lest I fall
And perish utterly.

Can boundless love reject?
Shall mercy say me nay,
Who cry with all Thine own elect
Before Thee, night and day?



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/faint_falls_the_gentle_voice_of_prayer.php

Faint falls the gentle voice of prayer,
In the wild sounds that fill the air,
Yet, Lord, we know that voice is heard,
Not less than if Thy throne it stirred.

Thine ear, Thou tender One, is caught,
If we but bend the knee in thought;
No choral song that shakes the sky
Floats farther than the Christian’s sigh.

Not all the darkness of the land
Can hide the lifted eye and hand;
Nor need the clanging conflict cease,
To make Thee hear our cries for peace.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/faintly.php

Written by John Barnett 


Faintly you surround me
Faintly you surround me
Faintly you surround me
And I feel your touch, And I feel your touch

The wind in the trees softly whispers
Wind in the trees softly whispers
Wind in the trees softly whispers
And I hear your voice, And I hear your voice

And I worship you, oh Lord, my God
And I worship you, oh Lord, my God
And I worship you, oh Lord, my God

© 1995 Mercy/Vineyard Publishing
CCLI #1596342
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fair_waved_the_golden_corn.php

Fair waved the golden corn,
In Canaan’s pleasant land,
When full of joy, some shining morn,
Went forth the reaper band.

To God so good and great
Their cheerful thanks they pour;
Then carry to His temple gate
The choicest of their store.

Like Israel, Lord, we give
Our earliest fruits to Thee,
And pray that, long as we shall live,
We may Thy children be.

Thine is our youthful prime,
And life and all its powers,
Be with us in our morning time,
And bless our evening hours.

In wisdom let us grow,
As years and strength are given,
That we may serve Thy Church below,
And join Thy saints in Heaven.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fair_weather_friends.php

Chorus:

Fairweather friends, fairweather sailors,
Will leave you stranded on life’s shore.
One good friend who truly loves you
Is worth the pain your heart endures.


We never know which way the wind will blow,
Nor when or where the next turmoil will be.
But He’s a solid rock when troubles grow,
And He’s holding out a saving hand for me.


He’ll be a refuge in the storm;
He’ll be a beacon in the night;
In the chilly winds of doubt He’ll keep you warm;
When you can’t find your way He’ll be your light
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fair_zion.php

O beautiful Zion, fair bride of the Lamb,
Thy marvelous light we behold,
Which shone on the nations enshrouded by darkness,
And millions were brought to thy fold. 

Refrain:
O Zion, fair Zion, thou church of the firstborn,
My heart in its rapture rejoices in thee;
The angels in heaven behold thee with wonder,
Thou glorious city, thou home of the free. 

Eclipsed was thy luster by long papal night,
And dimly the dark cloudy day
Revealed thee to eyes that were earnestly searching
For truth and the heavenly way. 

Thy light as the morning breaks forth in the earth,
Thy brightness all nations shall see;
The ransomed from Babel are eagerly turning
With songs of rejoicing to thee. 

O Zion, blest Zion, thy sun shall no more
Go down in obscurity’s night;
From out thy perfection of beauty is shining
The rays of God’s wonderful light. 

Eternity’s ages of bliss shall be thine,
In regions unclouded above;
And there shalt thou dwell evermore with thy Maker,
Delighting thyself in His love. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fairest_lord_jesus.php

Fairest Lord Jesus, Ruler of all nature,
O Thou of God and man the Son,
Thee will I cherish, Thee will I honor,
Thou, my soul’s glory, joy and crown.

Fair are the meadows, fairer still the woodlands,
Robed in the blooming garb of spring;
Jesus is fairer, Jesus is purer,
Who makes the woeful heart to sing.

Fair is the sunshine,
Fairer still the moonlight,
And all the twinkling starry host;
Jesus shines brighter, Jesus shines purer
Than all the angels heaven can boast.

All fairest beauty, heavenly and earthly,
Wondrously, Jesus, is found in Thee;
None can be nearer, fairer or dearer,
Than Thou, my Savior, art to me.

Beautiful Savior! Lord of all the nations!
Son of God and Son of Man!
Glory and honor, praise, adoration,
Now and forever more be Thine.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fairest_of_all_the_earth_beside.php

Fairest of all the earth beside,
Chiefest of all unto Thy bride,
Fullness divine in Thee I see,
Beautiful Man of Calvary!
Refrain

That Man of Calvary
Has won my heart from me,
And died to set me free,
Blest Man of Calvary!

Granting the sinner life and peace,
Granting the captive sweet release,
Shedding His blood to make us free,
Merciful Man of Calvary!

Refrain

Giving the gifts obtained for men,
Pouring out love beyond our ken,
Giving us spotless purity,
Bountiful Man of Calvary!

Refrain

Comfort of all my earthly way,
Jesus I’ll meet Thee some sweet day;
Center of glory Thee I’ll see,
Wonderful Man of Calvary!

Refrain
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/faith_brings_the_victory.php

Do you see in the distance yonder,
That line drawn up in array?
’Tis the host of the Loyal Leaguers,
Come forth to the conquest day.
They follow the bloodstained banner,
And the path that their Master trod,
For their sign is the cross of Calv’ry,
And their sword is the Word of God.

Refrain

Victory, we’ll sing of victory,
For Christ hath promised us the victory;
Victory, we’ll sing of victory,
Faith brings the victory.

They are marching away to conquest
That shall never know a defeat,
For the Christ hath assured all vict’ry
Who are faithful and scorn retreat.
Then join this advancing army,
And look to the throne above,
Lift the form of thy fallen brother,
And point to the God of love.

Refrain
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/faith_in_jesus.php

Gracious Lord, Thou canst make me clean;
Hide not Thy face from me;
Sick and faint, as the leper came,
Jesus, I come to Thee.
Thou canst remove the plague of sin,
Washing my inmost soul;
Jesus, I come with breaking heart,
Help me and make me whole.
Refrain

Gracious Lord, Thou canst make me clean;
Speak, and my soul shall live;
O my faith will not let Thee go
Till Thou my sin forgive.

Gracious Lord, Thou canst make me clean;
Weary and sad am I;
Bending low at Thy sacred feet,
Hear my repentant cry;
Faith in Thy Word has led me here,
Faith cannot plead in vain;
Lord, I believe; O cleanse me now,
Wash me from every stain.

Refrain

Gracious Lord, Thou canst make me clean;
Lord, I am pleading still;
Now I hear from Thy lips divine,
“Child, thou hast faith—I will";
Joy to my soul, great joy has come,
Mourning and tears are o’er;
Sweet are Thy words of love to me,
“Go thou, and sin no more."


Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/faith_in_the_blood.php

If asked whereon I rest my claim
To full salvation’s joy,
If nothing more I need to name,
Or other words employ,
Besides our Savior’s blood and wounds,
To me all-satisfying grounds;
I answer then, “My claim is good!
’Tis based on Jesus’ blood."

This is my hope’s foundation firm,
Which ever shall endure;
Yea, at the end of life’s brief term,
I’ll rest thereon secure,
And dreaded death shall lose its sting,
As of my Savior’s wounds I sing;
His precious blood shall be the key
That opens Heav’n for me.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/faith_in_the_word_of_god.php

God says whosoever believes on His Son,
Has pardon obtained and a new life begun;
His sins blotted out, not by aught he has done,
But thro’ faith in the Word of God!
Refrain

His Word is a strong eternal rock,
Unshaken it stands thro’ fiercest shock;
Though Satan and all his hosts may mock,
I have faith in the Word of God!

And God will make righteous and cleanse from all sin
The one who the chiefest of sinners has been;
He sanctifies wholly and justifies him
Who has faith in the Word of God!

Refrain

O soul without God, without hope, without peace,
Just now come to Him, let your doubtings all cease;
He says He’ll receive you, your joys will increase,
O have faith in the Word of God.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/faith_is_a_living_power_from_heaven.php

Faith is a living power from Heaven
That grasps the promise God hath given,
A trust that cannot be o’erthrown,
Fixed heartily on Christ alone.

Faith finds in Christ whate’er we need
To save or strengthen us indeed,
Receives the grace He sends us down,
And makes us share His cross and crown.

Faith in the conscience worketh peace,
And bids the mourner’s weeping cease;
By faith the children’s place we claim,
And give all honor to one Name.

Faith feels the Spirit’s kindling breath
In love and hope that conquer death;
Faith worketh hourly joy in God,
And trusts and blesses e’en the rod.

We thank Thee then, O God of Heaven,
That Thou to us this faith hast given
In Jesus Christ Thy Son, Who is
Our only fount and source of bliss.

And from His fullness grant each soul
The rightful faith’s true end and goal,
The blessedness no foes destroy,
Eternal love and light and joy.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/faith_is_believing.php

Faith is believing, the promise is true,
Trusting in Jesus your strength to renew;
Resting so sweetly, secure on His word,
Shielded from danger with Jesus the Lord. 

Refrain:
Faith is believing, simply receiving
What in His promise God has revealed;
Trust Him forever, doubt Him, no, never,
Till thy petition His Spirit hath sealed. 

Faith is believing, why longer remain
Under the bondage of Satan’s domain?
See, though all blood-stained, the banner unfurled—
Faith is the victory that conquers the world. 

Faith is believing, the soul’s happy rest,
Faith is believing, though sorely oppressed;
Singing in triumph whatever assail,
High on the mountains or low in the vale. 

Faith is believing, then doubt Him no more,
Sell all your sorrows, your troubles give o’er;
Soar in the sunlight above every cloud,
Triumph forever, believing in God. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/faith_is_the_spirits_evidence.php

Faith is the Spirit's evidence,
A witness to the soul;
It claims no merits in itself,
But comes to Christ for all.

Its substance is the Lord of life,
The Christian is its home;
It leads the soul to full supplies,
And points out joys to come.

It claims in Christ a legacy,
And helps the child to see;
This faith, dear Saviour, is thy gift,
O give this faith to me.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/faith_is_the_victory.php

Encamped along the hills of light,
Ye Christian soldiers, rise.
And press the battle ere the night
Shall veil the glowing skies.
Against the foe in vales below
Let all our strength be hurled.
Faith is the victory, we know,
That overcomes the world.
Refrain

Faith is the victory! Faith is the victory!
O glorious victory, that overcomes the world.

His banner over us is love,
Our sword the Word of God.
We tread the road the saints above
With shouts of triumph trod.
By faith, they like a whirlwind’s breath,
Swept on o’er every field.
The faith by which they conquered death
Is still our shining shield.

Refrain

On every hand the foe we find
Drawn up in dread array.
Let tents of ease be left behind,
And onward to the fray.
Salvation’s helmet on each head,
With truth all girt about,
The earth shall tremble ’neath our tread,
And echo with our shout.

Refrain

To him that overcomes the foe,
White raiment shall be giv’n.
Before the angels he shall know
His name confessed in Heav’n.
Then onward from the hill of light,
Our hearts with love aflame,
We’ll vanquish all the hosts of night,
In Jesus’ conqu’ring Name.

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/faith_means_were_sure.php

Faith means we’re sure of what we hope to get;
We’re certain of the things that we do not see.
By faith we know that God made the world;
What’s here now was not made from what was seen.
Abel by faith offered God a better sacrifice;
And Enoch, too, by faith died not, but from this life did rise.
Though they are gone, they speak this word:
That without faith, none can please the Lord.

It was by faith that Noah built the ark,
When warned by God of things that were yet to pass.
Since he had faith, God did spare his life,
And made him an heir of His righteousness.
Abraham, too, when God said to leave his home behind,
Obeyed and went, though he knew not the land he was to find.
Though they are gone, they speak this word:
That without faith, none can please the Lord.

It was by faith that Abr’ham had a son,
Then offered him to God as a sacrifice.
Faith upheld Moses in Egypt’s land,
And faith let a lamb pay the firstborn’s price.
By faith the people passed through the sea as on dry land,
And faith was why the walls of Jericho just could not stand.
Though they are gone, they speak this word:
That without faith, none can please the Lord.

All these still lived by faith until they died,
Receiving not the things that had been made known.
They only saw them as from afar;
They knew that their country was not their own.
God therefore was not ashamed to be named as their Lord;
For they believed that He was real and would their faith reward.
Oh, give me faith to trust Your Word,
That by my life I may please You, Lord.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/faith_of_my_own.php

Words: Kody King and Jonny Williams © 2005

Lyrics:

Chorus:
Give me your strength
Give me your truth
Give me a faith of my own
Give me your strength
Give me your truth
Give me a faith of my own

When I was a boy not so long ago
I believed in You, but the faith was not my own
I know You’re by my side, but now I feel alone
Lost in this world where I’ve been thrown

I am not a child, I strive to be the man
Where faith is not just what I believe, it’s who I am
Help me to look on high, help me to take a stand
Lead me down the path to find your plan

Repeat Chorus

I need a faith of my own
What now?
Would you think that I’m grown up now?
Would you think that I’ve blown up now?
After what He has shown us
How could you think it would last?
Think it would not be a flash in the pan?
Think you would not need to ask of the Man?
Take a lasting grasp of His hand
So I’m wondering
How could He see in me?
How could His spirit be in me?
How could He use me just to see
That I need to be in His presence to truly see
That His message seeps into me
It holds fast, a slash through the heart of me?
My faith has got to last
And blast way past the place where I used to be

Strugglin’ with the faith I’ve been given
Confusin’ fantasy with the life I’ve been livin’
How can my faith be truly blessed
Unless it’s been tested and perfected
Give me a way to see
The chosen path You’ve laid before me
Give me the strength to lean on You
No matter where I’ve been or what I’ve been through
Faith (give me a faith)
That’s truly grown (I need a faith)
Faith
That I can just call my own
Bring me back to the place and the path and the life to me
That You’ve truly shown

Repeat Chorus

Now I am not a child, I strive to be the man
Where faith is not just what I believe, it’s who I am


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/faith_of_our_brothers.php

Faith of our brothers, suffering sore,
Enduring prison, famine, and sword,
O Holy Spirit, give comfort, we pray,
May they this day find strength in Thy Word.
Faith of our brothers, holy faith,
May they be true to thee till death!

Tortured and killed for Thy dear Name,
Lord, give them grace to count all but loss,
May they hold steadfast to the end,
Sharing the sufferings of the cross.
Faith of our brothers, holy faith,
May they be true to thee till death!

Our brothers, chained in prisons dark,
Are still in heart and conscience free,
O may they know thy deep, sweet peace,
Fill them with joy for all to see.
Faith of our brothers, holy faith,
May they be true to thee till death!

Faith of our brothers! May they love
Both friend and foe in all their strife,
And preach Thee too, as love knows how,
By kindly words and virtuous life.
Faith of our brothers, holy faith,
May they be true to thee till death!

And Lord, may we be ready too,
To give our lives, if needed, for Thee,
May we be strong in Thy great strength,
And live each day, committed to Thee.
Faith of all brothers, holy faith,
May we be true to thee till death!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/faith_of_our_fathers.php

Faith of our fathers, living still,

In spite of dungeon, fire and sword;
O how our hearts beat high with joy
Whenever we hear that glorious Word!
Refrain

Faith of our fathers, holy faith!
We will be true to thee till death.

Faith of our fathers, we will strive
To win all nations unto Thee;
And through the truth that comes from God,
We all shall then be truly free.

Refrain

Faith of our fathers, we will love
Both friend and foe in all our strife;
And preach Thee, too, as love knows how
By kindly words and virtuous life.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/faith_of_our_mothers.php

Faith of our mothers, living still
In cradle song and bedtime prayer;
In nursery lore and fireside love,
Thy presence still pervades the air:
Faith of our mothers, living faith!
We will be true to thee to death.

Faith of our mothers, loving faith,
Fount of our childhood's trust and grace,
Oh, may thy consercration prove
Source of a finer, nobler race:
Faith of our mothers, living faith,
We will be true to thee till death.

Faith of our mothers, guiding faith,
For youthful longing, youthful doubt,
How blurred our vision, blind our way,
Thy providential care without:
Faith of our mothers, guiding faith,
We will be true to thee till death.

Faith of our mothers, Christian faith,
Is truth beyond our stumbling creeds,
Still serve the home and save the Church,
And breathe thy spirit through our deeds:
Faith of our mothers, Christian faith!
We will be true to thee till death.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/faith.php

If thou wilt know the fountain deep,
Of sweet unbroken rest;

The rest of faith thy soul shall keep,
He that believes is ever blest. 

Refrain:
Put on thy strength, O Zion, rise,
And fix thy trust above the skies;
Move out on faith’s almighty plane,
Through Him that loved us dare to reign. 

The gift of faith no limit knows,
Save God’s unbounded Word;
It triumphs o’er its giant foes,
And glorifies the blessed Lord. 

Stay not in feeble unbelief,
When God commands be strong;
Be strong in Him, the Word believe,
And shout the overcomer’s song. 

I can do all in Jesus’ name,
Thus sings the faith of God;
It sings and hills of trouble flee,
It rides triumphant on the flood. 
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/faithful_and_just.php

Lord, You're faithful and just
In You I put my trust, Mighty God
Everlasting Father
Your Word is faithful and true
What You promised to do
Oh Lord, Your Word endures forever
Chorus:

You're faithful, faithful
And Your mercy never ends
The world will pass away
But Your words are here to stay
You're wonderful, counselor, Mighty God
Lord Jehovah, You are the great I AM.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/faithful_and_true.php

Faithful and true
We lead ye forth
Where love triumphant
Shall crown ye with joy
Star of renown
Flower of the earth
Blessed be ye both
Far from all life's annoy

Champion victorious
Go thou before
Maid bright and glorious
Go thou before
Earth's noisy revel
Ye have forsaken
Tender delight for you now awaken

Fragrant abode
Enshrine ye in bliss
Splendor and state
In joy ye dismiss

Faithful and true
We lead ye forth
Where love triumphant
Shall crown ye with joy
Star of renown
Flower of the earth
Blessed be ye both
Far from all life's annoy 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/faithful_father.php



Words and Music by Brian Doerksen

Father, I can't explain this kind of love
This kind of grace
I know I still break Your heart
And yet You run to welcome me


This is my song of praise to You
For who You are and all that You do
From the moment my life began
You have been faithful

Father I love the way you hold me close
And say my name
I know when my life is through
My heart will find its home in You


This is my song of praise to You
For who You are and all that You do
From the moment my life began
You have been faithful
You will be faithful
Forever faithful
Father



This is our song of praise to You
For who You are and all that You do
From before the world began
You have been faithful (repeat twice)
You will be faithful
Forever faithful
Father

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/faithful_one.php

Words and music: Brian Doerksen


Faithful One, so unchanging
Ageless one, you're my Rock of Peace.
Lord of all, I depend on You,

I call out to you, 
again and again
I call out to you, 
again and again

You are my rock in times of trouble,
You lift me up when I fall down;
all through the storm,
Your love is the anchor,
my hope is in You alone.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/faithful_shepherd_feed_me.php

Faithful Shepherd, feed me
In the pastures green;
Faithful Shepherd, lead me
Where Thy steps are seen.

Hold me fast, and guide me
In the narrow way;
So, with Thee beside me,
I shall never stray.

Daily bring me nearer
To the heav’nly shore;
Make my faith grow clearer,
May I love Thee more.

Hallow every pleasure,
Every gift and pain;
Be Thyself my treasure,
Though none else I gain.

Day by day prepare me
As Thou seest best,
Then let angels bear me
To Thy promised rest.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/faithful_to_the_end.php

Words and music: Pete Vega and Danice Sweet

Lyrics:

Chorus:
Faithful, faithful to the end
Holding on to the Savior’s hand
Comes a time you must take a stand
So be faithful, faithful to the end

Repeat Chorus

By faith a baby takes a step
Though falling causes pain
Practice making permanent
This painful walking game (this painful walking game)
So be...

Repeat Chorus

I stumble like a child at times
And getting up’s so very tough
But falling brings me to my knees
And I’m not there near enough (not there near enough)
So be...

Repeat Chorus

The trials come upon us
We stand the test of time
We run or will we falter
Our faith’s the bottom line (our faith's the bottom line)
So be...

Repeat Chorus

Bridge:
Christ will dwell in your heart
If you have the faith
If you have the faith (sure of hope what we hope for, certain of what we don't 
see)
So be...

Repeat Chorus (x2)

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/faithful_vigil_ended.php

Faithful vigil ended,
watching, waiting cease;
Master, grant your servant
his discharge in peace.

All the Spirit promised,
all the Father willed,
now these eyes behold it
perfectly fulfilled.

This your great deliverance
sets your people free;
Christ their light uplifted
all the nations see.

Christ, your people's glory!
Watching, doubting cease:
grant to us your servants
our discharge in peace.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/faithfully.php

Words and music: Gary Miller © 1996 Anthony K. Music (ASCAP)

Lyrics: 

We are children of the Father (faithfully)
Followers of Jesus Christ (faithfully)
Daily walking in His Spirit
And we will praise the Lord faithfully
And we will serve the Lord faithfully
And we will love the Lord and His people
Faithfully (always loving faithfully) 

We are children of the Father (faithfully)
Followers of Jesus Christ (faithfully)
Daily walking in His Spirit
And we will praise the Lord faithfully
And we will serve the Lord faithfully
And we will love the Lord and His people
Faithfully 

Repeat All 

Repeat Verse 2 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fall_on_me.php

Fall on me
Every so gently
Breathe on, breathe on these dry bones

Shower me
In Your love
Washing, washing my filthy stains
My filthy stains
And break these chains
And break these chains
Set me free
Set me free

© 2000 Vineyard Songs Canada 
CCLI# 1596342

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fallen_leaves.php

On this cold November morning here I stand
By the graveside of this dear forgotten man
Thinking of the friends he lost for love of gold
This old story through the years has oft been told. 

Some folks drift along through life and never thrill
To the feeling that a good deed brings, until
It's too late but they're ready to lie down
There beneath the leaves that are scattered on the ground. 


Fallen leaves that lie scattered on the ground
The birds and flowers that were here cannot be found
All the friends we ever had are not around
They are scattered like the leaves upon the ground. 


Lord let my eyes see every need of every man
Make me stop and always lend a helping hand
Then when I'm laid beneath my little grassy mound
There'll be more friends around than leaves upon the ground. 


To your grave there's no use taking any gold
You cannot use it when it's time for hands to fold
When you leave this earth for a better home someday
The only things you'll take are what you gave away. 


Fallen leaves that lie scattered on the ground
The birds and flowers that were here cannot be found
All the friends we ever had are not around
They are scattered like the leaves upon the ground. 



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fallen_walls_and_open_doors.php

Words and music: Keith Lancaster © 1991 Anthony K. Music (ASCAP)

Lyrics:

Chorus (with echo):
Fallen walls and open doors
We are not bound anymore
We must follow when He calls
Through open doors and fallen walls

Lord give me the courage to listen when You're speaking (when You're speaking)
So I can be ready (so I can be ready) to practice what I'm preaching
The world is changing (changing, changing, the world is changing) in ways that 
we've been hoping
The walls are falling (falling, falling), and doors keep flying open

Repeat Chorus

The people are searching (searchin', searchin'), and willing to take chances
We've got to be serving (we've got to be serving), it's time to take advances 
(we're making advances)
The need is urgent and time is of the essence
Let's take them the Gospel (we'll take 'em the Gospel) so they can know His 
presence (presence, they can know His presence)

Repeat Chorus

Fallen walls...

Repeat Chorus (with stepouts)
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/falling_leaves.php

[G] By the grave site of this near forgotten [C] man 
On this [D] cold November morning here I [G] stand 
Thinking of the friends he lost for the love of [C] gold 
This story [D] through the years has often been [G] told 

(G) Falling leaves that lie scattered on the (C) ground,
The birds and (D) flowers that were here cannot be (G) found.
All the friends that he once knew are not (C) around.
They're all (D) scattered like the leaves upon the (G) ground.

[G] Some folks drift along through life and never [C] thrill,
To the [D] feeling that a good deed brings [G] until,
It's too late and they are ready to lie [C] down,
There [D] beneath the leaves that's scattered on the [G] ground.

[G] Lord, let my eyes see every need of every [C] man,
Make me [D] stop and always lend a helping [G] hand,
Then when I'm laid beneath that little grassy [C] mound,
There'll [D] be more friends around than leaves upon the [G] ground.

[G] To your grave there's no use taking any [C] gold,
You cannot [D] use it when it's time for hands to [G] fold,
When you leave this earth for a better home [C] someday,
The only [D] thing you'll take is what you gave [G] away


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/falter_not.php

Falter not nor look behind thee,
Cast thy every weight aside;
Haste to win the prize before thee,
Trusting Him, thy precious Guide.
Refrain

Falter not, nor look behind thee,
Still thy course with joy pursue;
Persevere, for thou must conquer,
With the cross of Christ in view.

Falter not nor look behind thee,
Firm and fearless take thy place;
Robe and crown and palm are waiting
For the victors in the race.

Refrain

Falter not nor look behind thee,
Lest thy labor prove in vain;
Run with patience, and remember
Thou hast much to lose or gain.

Refrain

Falter not nor look behind thee,
Lo, the prize is just in sight;
One more struggle, meet it bravely,
Speed thee on with all thy might.

Refrain

Falter not nor look behind thee,
What of all thy trials past,
If by grace through faith in Jesus,
Thine the victor’s crown at last?

Refrain



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/family_bible.php

[C] There's A Fam'ly [F] Bible on the [C] table
Each [Am] page is torn and [D] hard to [G7] read
But [C] The Fam'ly [F] Bible on the [C] table
Will [F] ever be my [C] key to [G] memo-[C] ries.

[C] At the close of [F] day when work was [C] over
And [Am] when the evening [D] meal was [G7] done
Dad would [C] read to us [F] from The Fam'ly [C] Bible
And we'd [F] count our many [C] blessings [G7] one by [C] one.

Refrain:
I can [F] see us [Bb] sittin' 'round the [F] table
When from The Fam'ly Bible Dad would [C] read
(1) I can hear my [F] mother softly [C] singing
(2) I can hear my [F] mama softly [C] singing
Rock of Ages, [F] Rock of [C] Ages [G7] cleft for [C] me.

This old world of ours is full of troubles
But this world would oh, so better be
If we'd find more Bibles on the table
And mothers singing Rock of Ages cleft for me.

Refrain:



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/family_of_god.php

I'm so glad I'm a part of the Family of God,
I've been washed in the fountain, cleansed by His blood!
Joint heirs with Jesus as we travel this sod,
For I'm part of the family,
The Family of God.

You will notice we say "brother and sister" 'round here,
It's because we're a family and these are so near;
When one has a heartache, we all share the tears,
And rejoice in each victory in this family so dear. 

I'm so glad I'm a part of the Family of God,
I've been washed in the fountain, cleansed by His blood!
Joint heirs with Jesus as we travel this sod,
For I'm part of the family,
The Family of God.

From the door of an orphanage to the house of the King,
No longer an outcast, a new song I sing;
From rags unto riches, from the weak to the strong,
I'm not worthy to be here, but praise God I belong! 

I'm so glad I'm a part of the Family of God,
I've been washed in the fountain, cleansed by His Blood!
Joint heirs with Jesus as we travel this sod,
For I'm part of the family,
The Family of God



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/family_reunion.php

Chorus: 
Come one, come all to the family reunion
With mother and daddy so sweet
Come one, come all to the family reunion
It might be the last time we'll meet. 

Now mother is sick she's tired and weary
She can't go another mile
She loves her children and she wants them near her
Once more just to see their smile. 

What good will the roses do daddy up yonder
So why not give them today
While he is still living and loving his children
To daddy it's better this way. 

Chorus:



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/family_song.php

Words and music: Steve Hampton



Here we are gathered together as a family
Bound as one, lifting up our voices to the King of Kings
We cry Abba, Father, worthy is Your name
We cry Abba, Father, worthy is Your name

Here we are singing together as a family
Bound as one, lifting up our voices to the King of Kings
We sing Abba, Father, holy is Your name
Abba, Father, holy is Your name





https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/famous_one.php

You are the Lord, the Famous One, Famous One
Great is Your name in all the earth
The heavens declare You’re glorious, glorious
Great is Your fame beyond the earth

And for all You’ve done and yet to do 
With every breath I’m praising You
Desire of nations and every heart
You alone are God, You alone are God

You are the Lord, the Famous One, Famous One
Great is Your name in all the earth
The heavens declare You’re glorious, glorious
Great is Your fame beyond the earth

The morning star is shining through
And every eye is watching You
Revealed by nature and miracles
You are beautiful, You are beautiful 

You are the Lord, the Famous One, Famous One
Great is Your name in all the earth
The heavens declare You’re glorious, glorious
Great is Your fame beyond the earth

You are the Lord, the Famous One, Famous One
Great is Your name in all the earth
The heavens declare You’re glorious, glorious
Great is Your fame beyond the earth





https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/far_above_all.php

"Far above all" is our Saviour enthroned;
Crowned is the Lamb who for sinners atoned;
Living forever to list to our call,
God hath exalted Him "far above all."

Refrain:
"Far above all!" "far above all!"
Jesus the Crucified, "far above all!"
Low at His footstool adoring we fall,
God hath exalted Him "far above all."

When the fierce tempest, uplifting its waves,
Seeks to engulf us, we cry and He saves;
Looking to Jesus, upheld by His hand,
Tread we the billows as safe as on land.

High are the cities that dare our assault,
Strong are the barriers that call us to halt;
March we on fearless, and down they must fall,
Vanquished by faith in Him "far above all."

His is the kingdom from pole unto pole;
"Far above all" while the ages shall roll;
With Him the victors, who followed His call,
Share in His royalty "far above all."





https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/far_and_near.php

Far and near the fields are teeming
With the waves of ripened grain;
Far and near their gold is gleaming
O’er the sunny slope and plain.
Refrain

Lord of harvest, send forth reapers!
Hear us, Lord, to Thee we cry;
Send them now the sheaves to gather
Ere the harvest time pass by.

Send them forth with morn’s first beaming,
Send them in the noontide’s glare;
When the sun’s last rays are gleaming,
Bid them gather everywhere.

Refrain

O thou, whom thy Lord is sending,
Gather now the sheaves of gold;
Heav’nward then at evening wending,
Thou shalt come with joy untold.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/far_away.php

Far away in the depths of my spirit tonight
Rolls a melody sweeter than psalm;
In celestial strains it unceasingly falls
O’er my soul like an infinite calm.
Refrain

Peace, peace, wonderful peace,
Coming down from the Father above!
Sweep over my spirit forever, I pray
In fathomless billows of love!

What a treasure I have in this wonderful peace,
Buried deep in the heart of my soul,
So secure that no power can mine it away,
While the years of eternity roll!

Refrain

I am resting tonight in this wonderful peace,
Resting sweetly in Jesus’ control;
For I’m kept from all danger by night and by day,
And His glory is flooding my soul!

Refrain

And I think when I rise to that city of peace,
Where the Anchor of peace I shall see,
That one strain of the song which the ransomed will sing
In that heavenly kingdom will be:

Refrain

Ah, soul! are you here without comfort and rest,
Marching down the rough pathway of time?
Make Jesus your Friend ere the shadows grow dark;
O accept of this peace so sublime!

Refrain



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/far_away_the_noise_of_strife.php

Far away the noise of strife upon my ear is falling.
Then I know the sins of earth beset on every hand.
Doubt and fear and things of earth in vain to me are calling.
None of these shall move me from Beulah Land.
Refrain

I’m living on the mountain, underneath a cloudless sky.
I’m drinking at the fountain that never shall run dry.
O yes! I’m feasting on the manna from a bountiful supply,
For I am dwelling in Beulah Land.

Far below the storm of doubt upon the world is beating.
Sons of men in battle long the enemy withstand.
Safe am I within the castle of God’s Word retreating.
Nothing then can reach me—’tis Beulah Land.

Refrain

Let the stormy breezes blow, their cry cannot alarm me;
I am safely sheltered here, protected by God’s hand.
Here the sun is always shining, here there’s naught can harm me.
I am safe forever in Beulah Land.

Refrain

Viewing here the works of God, I sink in contemplation.
Hearing now His blessèd voice, I see the way He planned.
Dwelling in the Spirit here I learn of full salvation.
Gladly I will tarry in Beulah Land.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/far_be_sorrow.php



Far be sorrow, tears and sighing!
Waves are calming, storms are dying,
Moses hath o’erpassed the sea,
Israel’s captive hosts are free;
Life by death slew death and saved us,
In His blood the Lamb hath saved us,
Clothing us with victory.

Jesus Christ from death has risen,
Lo! His Godhead bursts the prison,
While His Manhood passes free,
Vanquishing our misery.
Rise we free from condemnation;
Through our God’s humiliation,
Ours is now the victory.

Vain the foe’s despair and madness!
See the dayspring of our gladness!
Slaves no more of Satan we;
Children, by the Son set free;
Rise, for life with death has striven,
All the snares of hell are riven,
Rise and claim the victory.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/far_beyond_all_comprehension.php



Far beyond all comprehension
Is Jehovah's covenant love;
Who can fathom its dimension
Or its unknown limits prove?

Ere the earth upon its basis
By creating power was built,
His designs were wise and gracious
For removing human guilt.

He displayed His grand intention
On the mount at Calvary,
When He died for our redemption,
Lifted high upon the tree.

O, how sweet to view the flowing
Of His soul-redeeming blood!
With divine assurance knowing
That it made my peace with God.

Freely Thou wilt bring to heaven
All Thy chosen, ransomed race,
Who to Thee, their Head, were given
In the covenant of grace.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/far_down_the_ages_now.php

Far down the ages now,
Her journey well nigh done,
The pilgrim Church pursues her way,
And longs to reach her crown.

No wider is the gate,
No broader is the way,
No smoother is the ancient path
That leads to light and day.

No feebler is the foe,
No slacker grows the fight,
Nor less the need of armor tried,
Of shield and helmet bright.

Thus onward still we press,
Through evil and through good,
Through pain, or poverty, or want,
Through peril or through blood.

Still faithful to our God,
And to our Captain true,
We follow where He leads the way,
The kingdom still in view.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/far_far_away.php

Far, far away, there’s a many-mansioned dwelling,
Where the Savior waits to welcome the dear souls for whom He died;
All across the darksome valley, I can hear their anthems swelling,
And amid the golden glory I can see them by His side.
In the home so far away.

Far, far away, there’s a haven deep and quiet,
Where the noiseless waves lie sleeping on the mountain-sheltered shore,
Where the surges never enter, where no stormy tempests riot,
Where the sails are furled forever and the ship goes out no more,
From the haven far away.

Onward I travel, in gladness or in sorrow,
Across these trackless waters, with His love to cheer me through;
And as every sunset closes, I can fancy that the morrow
Will fire the heav’nly mountains, with the haven full in view
And no longer far away.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/far_far_away.php

Far, far away, there’s a many-mansioned dwelling,
Where the Savior waits to welcome the dear souls for whom He died;
All across the darksome valley, I can hear their anthems swelling,
And amid the golden glory I can see them by His side.
In the home so far away.

Far, far away, there’s a haven deep and quiet,
Where the noiseless waves lie sleeping on the mountain-sheltered shore,
Where the surges never enter, where no stormy tempests riot,
Where the sails are furled forever and the ship goes out no more,
From the haven far away.

Onward I travel, in gladness or in sorrow,
Across these trackless waters, with His love to cheer me through;
And as every sunset closes, I can fancy that the morrow
Will fire the heav’nly mountains, with the haven full in view
And no longer far away.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/far_far_away_on_judeas_plains.php

Far, far away on Judea’s plains,
Shepherds of old heard the joyous strains:
Refrain

Glory to God, glory to God,
Glory to God in the highest;
Peace on earth, good will to men;
Peace on earth, good will to men.

Sweet are these strains of redeeming love,
Message of mercy from heaven above:

Refrain

Lord, with the angels we too would rejoice;
Help us to sing with the heart and voice:

Refrain

Hasten the time when, from every clime,
Men shall unite in the strains sublime:

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/far_far_on_the_other_side.php

I’ve entered the land dearly bought by His blood,
Passed over Jordan, surrendered to God;
I’ve found His sufficiency here in this land,
Glory to Jesus forever!
Refrain

Far, far on the other side,
I’m living across the river,
Burned are the bridges ’twixt me and the world,
Glory to Jesus forever!

The giants are conquered the spies said were here,
Jesus is victor, I need have no fear;
Summer in winter and joy all the year,
Glory to Jesus forever!

Refrain

The manna is gone and the corn is my food,
Dead to the world and I’m living in God;
I’ve ceased saying can’t since I found that He could—
Glory to Jesus forever!

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/far_from_my_heavenly_home.php

Far from my heavenly home,
Far from my Father’s breast,
Fainting I cry, blest Spirit, come
And speed me to my rest.

My spirit homeward turns
And fain would thither flee;
My heart, O Zion, droops and yearns,
When I remember thee.

To thee, to thee I press,
A dark and toilsome road;
When shall I pass the wilderness,
And reach the saint’s abode?

God of my life, be near;
On Thee my hopes I cast:
O guide me through the desert here,
And bring me home at last.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/far_from_my_thoughts.php

Far from my thoughts, vain world, begone,
Let my religious hours alone:
Fain would my eyes my Savior see;
I wait a visit, Lord, from Thee.

My heart grows warm with holy fire,
And kindles with a pure desire:
Come, my dear Jesus, from above,
And feed my soul with heav’nly love.

The trees of life immortal stand
In fragrant rows at Thy right hand;
And in sweet murmurs, by their side,
Rivers of bliss perpetual glide.

Haste, then, but with a smiling face,
And spread the table of Thy grace;
Bring down a taste of fruit divine,
And cheer my heart with sacred wine.

Bless’d Jesus, what delicious fare!
How sweet Thy entertainments are!
Never did angels taste above
Redeeming grace, and dying love.

Hail, great Immanuel, all divine!
In Thee Thy Father’s glories shine;
Thou brightest, sweetest, fairest One,
That eyes have seen or angels known.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/far_off_i_see_the_goal.php

Far off I see the goal—O Savior, guide me;
I feel my strength is small—be Thou beside me;
With vision ever clear, with love that conquers fear,
And grace to persevere, O Lord, provide me.

Whene’er Thy way seems strange, go Thou before me;
And, lest my heart should change, O Lord, watch o’er me;
But, should my faith prove frail, and I through blindness fail,
O let Thy grace prevail, and still restore me.

Should earthly pleasures wane, and joy forsake me;
And lonely hours of pain at length o’ertake me,
My hand in Thine hold fast till sorrow be o’erpast,
And gentle death at last for Heav’n awake me.

There, with the ransomed throng who praise forever
The love that made them strong to serve forever,
I, too, would seek Thy face, Thy finished work retrace,
And magnify Thy grace, redeemed forever.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/far_off_o_god_and_yet_so_near.php

Far off, O God, and yet most near,
Unseen, yet shining clear in all,
Thy presence moves, Thy ways appear,
In system’s rise and sparrow’s fall.

Thy purpose through the ages ran,
Thy Word Thy prophets bore abroad,
Thy love became a Son of Man,
To make men with Him sons of God.

Our eyes Thy loveliness discern,
Where nature weaves Thy wondrous dress,
And in sweet human lives we learn
The beauty of Thy holiness.

Our lives within Thy being stand,
Our sciences omniscience prove,
Thy law is but Thy clasping hand,
Thine order is Thy perfect love.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/far_out_on_the_desolate_billow.php

Far out on the desolate billow
The sailor sails the sea,
Alone with the night and the tempest,
Where countless dangers be;
Yet never alone is the Christian,
Who lives by faith and prayer;
Refrain

For God is a Friend unfailing,
And God is ev’rywhere.

Far down in the earth’s dark bosom
The miner mines the ore;
Death lurks in the dark behind him,
And hides in the rock before.
Yet never alone is the Christian,
Who lives by faith and prayer;

Refrain

Forth into the dreadful battle
The steadfast soldier goes;
No friend, when he lies adying,
His eyes to kiss and close.
Yet never alone is the Christian,
Who lives by faith and prayer;

Refrain

Lord, grant as we sail life’s ocean,
Or delve in its mines of woe,
Or fight in its terrible conflict,
This comfort all to know,
That never alone is the Christian,
Who lives by faith and prayer;

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/far_shining_names_from_age_to_age.php

Far-shining names from age to age
enrich the Church's heritage,
the loyal liegemen of the Lord,
who found in thee their great reward.

One name from that immortal throng
inspires to-day our festal song:
in loving memory we hold
the bishop and the saint of old,

who, far away in eastern land,
with gentle heart and open hand
loved all things living, shared his store
with homeless men who sought his door.

Friend of the poor, no less was he
the guardian saint of those at sea;
o'er wave-swept rock and sheltered bay
God's churches bear his name to-day.

And his the skill, the tender art
that wins the trustful, child-like heart:
his dearest title to the end
'Saint Nicolas, the children's friend.'

To thee, 0 Lord, the praise be given
for this true citizen of heaven
a star above the stormy sea
to lead the wanderer home to thee.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/far_side_bank_of_jordan.php

Words and music: Terry Smith


I believe my steps are growing wearier each day,
Still, I’ve got a journey on my mind.
Cares of this old world have ceased to make me want to stay,
And my one regret is leaving you behind.

If it proves to be his will that I am first to go,
And somehow I’ve a feeling it will be.
When it comes your time to travel likewise don’t you feel lost,
For I will be the first one that you see.


Chorus:
And I’ll be waiting on the far side banks of Jordan.
I’ll be waiting drawing pictures in the sand.
And when I see you coming I will rise up with a shout,
And come running through the shallow waters reaching for 
your hand.


Through this world we have laboured hard to earn our meagre fare,
It’s brought us trembling hands and failing eyes.
I’ll just rest here on the shore and turn my eyes away,
Until you come and then we’ll see paradise.


Chorus x2

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/farewell_i_gladly_bid_thee.php

1. Farewell I gladly bid Thee,
False, evil world, farewell.
Thy life is vain and sinful,
With Thee I would not dwell.
I long to be in heaven,
In that untroubled sphere
Where they will be rewarded
Who served their God while here. 

2. By Thy good counsel lead me,
O Son of God, my Stay;
In each perplexing trial
Help me, O Lord, I pray.
Mine hour of sorrow shorten,
Support my fainting heart,
From every cross deliver,
The crown of life impart. 

3. When darkness round me gathers,
Thy name and cross, still bright,
Deep in my heart are sparkling
Like stars in blackest night.
O heart, this image cherish:
The Christ on Calvary,
How patiently He suffered
And shed His blood for me! 

4. Lord, hide my soul securely
Deep in Thy wounded side;
From every danger shield me
And to Thy glory guide.
He has been truly blessed
Who reaches heaven above;
He has found perfect healing
Who rests upon Thy love. 

5. Lord, write my name, I pray Thee,
Now in the Book of Life
And with all true believers
Take me where joys are rife.
There let me bloom and flourish,
Thy perfect freedom prove,
And tell, as I adore Thee,
How faithful was Thy love.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/farewell_my_dear_brethren.php

1. Farewell, My Dear Brethren, The Time is At Hand
When we must be parted from this social band;
Our sev'ral engagements now call us away;
Separation is needful, and we must obey.

2. Farewell, my dear brethren, farewell for awhile.
We'll soon meet again if kind Providence smile,
But when we are parted and scattered abroad.
We'll pray for each other and trust in the Lord.

3. Farewell, younger brethren, just listed for war,
Sore trials await you, but Jesus is near;
Although you must travel this dark wilderness,
Your Captain's before you, he'll lead you to rest.

4. Farewell, my dear brethren, farewell all around;
Perhaps we'll not meet till the last trump shall sound;
To meet you in glory I give you my hand,
The Savior to praise in a pure social band.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/farewell_to_sin.php

I will part with thee, old master;
This is my firm resolve;
And I’ll boldly state my reason,
Why we must now dissolve. 

Refrain:
The wages of sin is death,
The wages of sin is death,
The wages of sin is death, and woe,
And bitter remorse; I’ve found it so;
Bitter, bitter,
Bitter remorse and woe. 

I have served thee long and faithful,
Confessed you were my lord;
All your way was dark and painful,
And what is my reward? 

I have given time and talents,
My health and honor, too,
And exposed my soul to torments,
And what did you bestow? 

You have flattered me, and promised
Much pleasure in your reign;
I have sowed and reaped your harvest,
Now what my wretched gain? 

While beneath your doleful bondage,
How oft your father came,
Saying, “There is here no passage
Out from your dark domain." 

But the blood of my Redeemer
Has saved me through and through,
So, in Jesus’ name, forever
I bid all sin adieu. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/farther_along.php

Tempted and tried will oft' me to wonder
Why it should be thus all the day long;
While there are others living about us,
Never molested, though in the wrong.

Farther along we'll know more about it.
Farther along we'll understand why;
Cheer up my brother live in the sunshine
We'll understand it all by and by.

When death has come and taken our loved ones
Leaving our homes so lonely and drear;
Then do we wonder how others prosper
Living so wicked year after year.

Farther along we'll know more about it.
Farther along we'll understand why;
Cheer up my brother live in the sunshine
We'll understand it all by and by.

Often I wonder why I must journey
Over a road so rugged and steep; 
While there are others living in comfort,
While with the lost I labor and weep. 

Farther along we'll know more about it.
Farther along we'll understand why;
Cheer up my brother live in the sunshine
We'll understand it all by and by

Faithful 'til death, said our loving Master, 
A few more days labor and wait;
Toils of the road will then be as nothing, 
As we sweep through the beautiful gates.

Farther along we'll know more about it.
Farther along we'll understand why;
Cheer up my brother live in the sunshine
We'll understand it all by and by.

When we see Jesus coming in glory; 
When He comes from His home in the sky; 
Then we shall meet Him in that bright mansion.
We'll understand it all by and by. 

Farther along we'll know more about it.
Farther along we'll understand why;
Cheer up my brother live in the sunshine
We'll understand it all by and by.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fast_sinks_the_sun_to_rest.php

Fast sinks the sun to rest,
Fast fall the shades of night;
Fain would the weary heart
Keep love's frail flame alight,
End the day that fading dies
With an offering of sacrifice.

E'en as the Crucified,
Calm in the hour of death,
Into his Father's hands
Yielded his latest breath,
So my spirit would repose
Safe in God's mighty keeping close.

Meekly beneath his hand
Lieth my helplessness,
Thinking and caring naught
Save what he purposes,
And in utter calm abides,
Dead to self and all besides.

Be it not I who live
But God who lives in me,
Reigning and triumphing
In love's sweet majesty;
May he mine forever be,
God who One is in Trinity.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_abraham.php

Words and Music: Kevin Schaffer and Gary Miller © 1995 Clifty Music 
(BMI)/Anthony K. Music (ASCAP)

Lyrics: 

He roamed the desert looking for a home
The only thing he knew was God said go
He didn't question when or why or where
He knew Jehovah was already there 

Chorus:
Father Abraham, you trusted God no matter the plan
Father Abraham, all you needed was a word from the Great I Am
Father Abraham, you always kept God's promises in your hand
Father Abraham, I've always wanted to step out on faith, now I know I can
Thank you father Abraham 

(interlude) (Abraham, Father Abraham) 

A holy angel spoke about a son
Sarai laughed she said it couldn't be done
But she and Abraham chose to trust the Lord
And nine months later their baby boy was born 

Repeat Chorus 

(interlude) (Abraham) 

Your only son was to be sacrificed
What would you do, what would you tell your wife?
You knew you had to do what God had said
By faith in God you knew he'd come back from the dead 

(God loves you) How much God must have loved you at that moment (He understood 
what you're going through)
(A Sacrifice) Knowing soon He'd have to do the same (it's the only thing that He 
could do)
(Blessed Son) Through His son you were blessed
Your faith was counted as righteousness
Through His Son the world is saved (A son would save the world) 

Repeat Chorus 

(interlude) (Father Abraham, Father Abraham, Father Abraham, Father) 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_again_in_jesus_name_we_meet.php

Father, again in Jesus’ Name we meet,
And bow in penitence beneath Your feet;
Again to You our feeble voices raise,
To sue for mercy, and to sing Your praise.

O we would bless You for Your ceaseless care,
And all Your works from day to day declare;
Is not our life with hourly mercies crowned?
Does not Your arm encircle us around?

Alas, unworthy of Your boundless love,
Too oft with careless feet from You we rove;
But now, encouraged by Your voice, we come,
Returning sinners to a Father’s home.

O by that Name in Whom all fulness dwells,
O by that love which ev’ry love excels,
O by that blood so freely shed for sin,
Open blest mercy’s gate and take us in.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_almighty_bless_us_with_your_blessing.php

Father Almighty, bless us with Thy blessing,
Answer in love Thy children’s supplication;
Hear Thou our prayer, the spoken and unspoken;
Hear us, O Father.

Shepherd of souls, Who bringest all who seek Thee
To pastures green, beside the peaceful waters;
Tenderest Guide, in ways of cheerful duty,
Lead us, good Shepherd.

Father of mercy, from Thy watch and keeping
No place can part, nor hour of time remove us;
Give us Thy good, and save us from our evil,
Infinite Sprit!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_and_friend.php

Father and Friend! Thy light, Thy love,
Beaming through all Thy works we see;
Thy glory gilds the heavens above,
And all the earth is full of Thee.

Thy voice we hear, Thy presence feel,
While Thou, too pure for mortal sight,
Involved in clouds, invisible,
Reignest the Lord of life and light.

We know not in what hallowed part
Of the wide heavens Thy throne may be,
But this we know, that where Thou art,
Strength, wisdom, goodness dwell with Thee.

Thy children shall not faint nor fear,
Sustained by this exalted thought;
Since Thou, their God, art everywhere,
They cannot be where Thou art not!


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_before_thy_throne_of_light.php

Father, before Thy throne of light
The guardian angels bend,
And ever in Thy presence bright
Their psalms adoring blend;
And casting down each golden crown,
Beside the crystal sea,
With voice and lyre, in happy quire,
Hymn glory, Lord, to Thee.

And as the rainbow luster falls
Athwart their glowing wings,
While seraph unto seraph calls,
And each Thy goodness sings;
So may we feel, as low we kneel
To pray Thee for Thy grace,
That Thou art here for all who fear
The brightness of Thy face.

Here, where the angels see us come
To worship day by day,
Teach us to seek our heav’nly home,
And love Thee e’en as they;
Teach us to raise our notes of praise,
With them Thy love to own,
That childhood’s flower and manhood’s power
Be Thine, and Thine alone.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_bless_our_school_today.php

Father, bless our school today;
Be in all we do and say;
Be in every song we sing,
Every prayer to Thee we bring.

Jesus, well belovèd Son,
May Thy will by us be done;
Come and meet with us today;
Teach us, Lord, Thyself, we pray.

Holy Spirit, mighty power,
Consecrate this Lord’s day hour;
Unto us Thine unction give;
Touch our souls that we may live.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_eternal_ruler_of_creation.php

Father eternal, Ruler of creation,
Spirit of life, which moved ere form was made;
Through the thick darkness covering every nation,
Light to man’s blindness, O be Thou our aid:
Thy kingdom come, O Lord, Thy will be done.

Races and peoples, lo! we stand divided,
And sharing not our griefs, no joy can share;
By wars and tumults love is mocked, derided,
His conquering cross no kingdom wills to bear:
Thy kingdom come, O Lord, Thy will be done.

Envious of heart, blind eyed, with tongues confounded,
Nation by nation still goes unforgiven;
In wrath and fear, by jealousies surrounded,
Building proud towers which shall not reach to heaven:
Thy kingdom come, O Lord, Thy will be done.

How shall we love Thee, holy, hidden Being,
If we love not the world which Thou hast made?
O give us brother love for better seeing
Thy world made flesh, and in a manger laid:
Thy kingdom come, O Lord, Thy will be done.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_forgive_me.php

What have I done to You my Lord?
How could I nail You to the tree?
My evil desires, my selfish ways
I hung You in agony (2x)

CHORUS

My Father forgive me
I’ve done so wrongly
I’m not deserving of Your love
My Father have mercy
Tho’ I am not worthy
Don’t cast me away
Don’t cast me away from You

What have I done to You my Lord?
I tried to have it all my way
I lived for my pleasures
I broke Your heart
I turned my Father away (2x)

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_forgive_the_savior_said.php

“Father, forgive," the Savior said
“They know not what they do";
His heart was moved when thus He prayed
For me, my friends, and you.

He saw, that as the Jews abused
And crucified His flesh,
So He, by us, would be refused,
And crucified afresh. 

Through love of sin, we long were prone
To act as Satan bid;
But now, with grief and shame we own,
We knew not what we did.

We knew not the desert of sin,
Nor Whom we thus defied;
Nor where our guilty souls had been,
If Jesus had not died.

We knew not what a law we broke,
How holy, just and pure!
Nor what a God we durst provoke,
But thought ourselves secure.

But Jesus all our guilt foresaw,
And shed His precious blood
To satisfy the holy law,
And make our peace with God.

My sin, dear Savior, made Thee bleed,
Yet didst Thou pray for me!
I knew not what I did, indeed,
When ignorant of Thee.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_god_we_glorify.php

Father, God, we glorify
Thy love to Adam’s seed;
Love that gave Thy Son to die,
And raised Him from the dead:
Him, for our offenses slain,
That we all might pardon find,
Thou hast brought to life again,
The Savior of mankind.

By Thy own right hand of power
Thou hast exalted Him,
Sent the mighty Conqueror
Thy people to redeem:
King of Saints, and Prince of Peace,
Him Thou hast for sinners giv’n,
Sinners from their sins to bless,
And lift them up to Heav’n.

Father, God, to us impart
The gift unspeakable;
Now in every waiting heart
Thy glorious Son reveal:
Quickened with our living Lord,
Let us in Thy Spirit rise,
Rise to all Thy life restored,
And bless Thee in the skies.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_who_hast_gathered.php

Father, Who hast gathered
This dear child to rest,
Unto Thee we yield him,
Sure Thou knowest best.

Thou, O Lord, Who gavest,
Dost Thine own reclaim;
Thou, O Lord, hast taken—
Blessèd still Thy Name!

Thine by right creative,
By redemption Thine,
By regeneration
And the holy sign.

Thou Who didst endow him
With baptismal grace,
Now in love hast brought him
To behold Thy face.

Safe from all earth’s sorrow,
Safe from all its pains,
Now this child of Adam,
Paradise regains:

Safe from all temptation,
Safe from fear of sin,
Through the blood of sprinkling
Holy, bright and clean.

Lay we this dear body
In the earth to sleep,
His sweet soul commending
Unto Thee to keep:

Looking for the dawning
Of that deathless day,
When all earthly shadows
Shall have fled away.

Only grant us, Father,
Courage in our strife,
And with him a portion
In unending life.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_hear_the_prayer_we_offer.php

Father, hear the prayer we offer:
Nor for ease that prayer shall be,
But for strength, that we may ever
Live our lives courageously.

Not forever in green pastures
Do we ask our way to be,
But the steep and rugged pathway
May we tread rejoicingly.

Not forever by still waters
Would we idly, quiet stay;
But would smite the living fountains
From the rocks along our way.

Be our strength in hours of weakness,
In our wanderings be our Guide;
Through endeavor, failure, danger,
Father, be Thou at our side.

Let our path be bright or dreary,
Storm or sunshine be our share;
May our souls in hope unweary
Make Thy work our ceaseless prayer.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_hear_thy_childrens_call.php

Refrain:
God the Father, God the Son,
God the Spirit, Three in One,
hear us from thy heavenly throne:
Spare us, holy Trinity.

Part I

Father, hear thy children's call;
humbly at thy feet we fall,
prodigals, confessing all:
we beseech thee, hear us.

Christ, beneath thy cross, we blame
all our life of sin and shame;
penitent we breathe thy Name:
we beseech thee, hear us.

Holy Spirit, grieved and tried,
oft forgotten and defied,
now we mourn our stubborn pride:
we beseech thee, hear us.

Love, that caused us first to be,
Love, that bled upon the tree,
Love, that draws us lovingly:
we beseech thee, hear us.

We thy call have disobeyed,
into paths of sin have strayed,
and repentance have delayed:
we beseech thee, hear us.

Sick, we come to thee for cure,
guilty, seek thy mercy sure,
evil, long to be made pure:
we beseech thee, hear us.

Blind, we pray that we may see;
bound, we pray to be made free;
stained, we pray for sanctity:
we beseech thee, hear us.

Thou who hear'st each contrite sigh
bidding sinful souls draw nigh,
willing not that one should die.
we beseech thee, hear us. Amen. 

Part II

By the gracious saving call,
spoken tenderly to all
who have shared man's guilt and fall.
we beseech thee, hear us.

By the nature Jesus wore,
by the stripes and death he bore,
by his life for evermore:
we beseech thee, hear us.

By the love that longs to bless,
pitying our sore distress,
leading us to holiness:
we beseech thee, hear us.

By the love so calm and strong,
patient still to suffer wrong
and our day of grace prolong:
we beseech thee, hear us.

By the love that speaks within,
calling us to flee from sin,
and the joy of goodness win:
we beseech thee, hear us.

By the love that bids thee spare,
by the heaven thou dost prepare,
by thy promises to prayer:
we beseech thee, hear us. Amen.

Part III

Teach us what thy love has borne,
that, with loving sorrow torn,
truly contrite we may mourn:
we beseech thee, hear us.

Gifts of light and grace bestow;
help us to resist the foe,
fearing what alone is woe:
we beseech thee. hear us.

Let not sin within us reign;
may we gladly suffer pain,
if it purge away our stain:
we beseech thee, hear us.

May we to all evil die,
fleshly longings crucify;
fix our hearts and thoughts on high:
we beseech thee, hear us.

Grant us faith to know thee near,
hail thy grace, thy judgment fear,
and through trial persevere:
we beseech thee, hear us.

Grant us hope from earth to rise,
and to strain with eager eyes
towards the promised heavenly prize:
we beseech thee, hear us.

Grant us love, thy love to own,
love to live for thee alone,
and the power of grace make known:
we beseech thee, hear us.

All our weak endeavors bless,
as we ever forward press;
lead us on to holiness:
we beseech thee, hear us.

Lead us daily nearer thee
till at last thy face we see,
crowned with thine own purity:
we beseech thee, hear us. Amen



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_how_wide_thy_glories_shine.php

Father, how wide Thy glories shine!
How high Thy wonders rise!
Known through the earth by thousand signs,
By thousand through the skies.

Those mighty orbs proclaim Thy power,
Their motions speak Thy skill,
And on the wings of every hour
We read Thy patience still.

But when we view Thy strange design
To save rebellious worms,
Our souls are filled with awe divine
To see what God performs.

Our thoughts are lost in reverent awe;
We love and we adore;
The first archangel never saw
So much of God before.

Part of Thy Name divinely stands
On all Thy creatures writ;
They show the labor of Thy hands,
Or impress of Thy feet.

When sinners break the Father’s laws,
The dying Son atones;
O the dear mysteries of His cross,
The triumph of his groans.

Here the whole Deity is known,
Nor dares a creature guess
Which of the glories brightest shone,
The justice, or the grace.

Now the full glories of the Lamb
Adorn the heavenly plains;
Sweet cherubs learn Immanuel’s Name,
And try their choicest strains.

O may I bear some humble part
In that immortal song!
Wonder and joy shall tune my heart,
And love command my tongue.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_i_know_that_all_my_life.php

Father, I know that all my life
Is portioned out for me,
And the changes that are sure to come
I do not fear to see;
But I ask Thee for a present mind
Intent on pleasing Thee.

I ask Thee for a thoughtful love,
Through constant watching wise,
To meet the glad with joyful smiles,
And to wipe the weeping eyes;
And a heart at leisure from itself,
To soothe and sympathize.

I would not have the restless will
That hurries to and fro,
Seeking for some great thing to do
Or secret thing to know;
I would be treated as a child,
And guided where I go.

Wherever in the world I am,
In whatsoe’er estate,
I have a fellowship with hearts
To keep and cultivate;
And a work of lowly love to do
For the Lord on Whom I wait.

So I ask Thee for daily strength,
To none that ask denied,
And a mind to blend with outward life
While keeping at Thy side;
Content to fill a little space,
If Thou be glorified.

And if some things I do not ask
In my cup of blessing be,
I would have my spirit filled the more
With grateful love to Thee,
More careful, not to serve Thee much,
But to please Thee perfectly.

There are briers besetting every path
That call for patient care;
There is a cross in every lot,
And an earnest need for prayer;
But a lowly heart that leans on Thee
Is happy anywhere.

In a service which Thy will appoints
There are no bonds for me;
For my inmost heart is taught “the truth"
That makes Thy children “free."
And a life of self renouncing love
Is a life of liberty.





https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_I_long_i_faint_to_see.php

1. Father, I Long, I Faint to See
The place of thine abode;
I'd leave thy earthly courts and flee
Up to thy seat, my God!

2. Here I behold thy distant face,
And 'tis a pleasing sight;
But to abide in thine embrace
Is infinite delight.

3. There all the heav'nly hosts are seen,
In shining ranks they move,
And drink immortal vigor in
With wonder and with love

4. Then at thy feet with awful fear
Th'adoring armies fall;
With joy they shrink to nothing there,
Before, th'eternal All.

5. There I would vie with all the host
In duty and in bliss,
While less than nothing I would boast,
And vanity confess.

6. The more thy glories strike my eyes
The humbler I shall lie;
Thus, while I sink, my joys shall rise
Unmeasurably high.





https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_i_scarcely_dare_to_pray.php

Father, I scarcely dare to pray,
So clear I see, now it is done,
How I have wasted half my day,
And left my work but just begun.
So clear I see that things I thought
Were right or harmless were a sin;
So clear I see that I have sought,
Unconscious, selfish aims to win.

So clear I see that I have hurt
The souls I might have helped to save;
That I have slothful been, inert,
Deaf to the calls Thy leaders gave.
In outskirts of Thy kingdoms vast
Father, the humblest spot give me;
Set me the lowliest task Thou hast,
Let me repentant work for Thee.




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_i_sing_thy_wondrous_grace.php

1. Father, I sing thy wondrous grace,
I bless my Savior's name;
He bought salvation for the poor,
And bore the sinner's shame. 

2. His deep distress has raised us high;
His duty and his zeal
Fulfilled the law which mortals broke,
And finished all thy will. 

3. His dying groans, his living songs,
Shall better please my God
Than harp or trumpet's solemn sound,
Than goat's or bullock's blood. 

4. This shall his humble followers see,
And set their hearts at rest
They by his death draw near to thee,
And live for ever blest. 

5. Let heav'n and all that dwell on high
To God their voices raise,
While lands and seas assist the sky,
And join t' advance the praise. 

6. Zion is thine, most holy God,
Thy Son shall bless her gates;
And glory purchased by his blood
For thy own Isr'el waits




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_i_stretch_my_hands_to_thee.php

Father, I stretch my hands to thee,
No other help I know;
If thou withdraw thyself from me,
Ah! whither shall I go? 

What did thy only Son endure
Before I drew my breath;
What pain, what labour, to secure
My soul from endless death! 

O Jesus, could I this believe,
I now should feel thy power;
Now all my wants thou wouldst relieve
In this, the accepted hour. 

Author of faith, to thee I lift
My weary, longing eyes:
O let me now receive that gift!
My soul without it dies. 

Surely thou canst not let me die;
O speak, and I shall live!
For here I will unwearied lie,
Till thou thy Spirit give. 

How would my fainting soul rejoice,
Could I but see thy face!
Now let me hear thy quickening voice,
And taste thy pardoning grace! 







https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_i_stretch_my_hands_to_thee.php

Father, I stretch my hands to thee,
No other help I know;
If thou withdraw thyself from me,
Ah! whither shall I go? 

What did thy only Son endure
Before I drew my breath;
What pain, what labour, to secure
My soul from endless death! 

O Jesus, could I this believe,
I now should feel thy power;
Now all my wants thou wouldst relieve
In this, the accepted hour. 

Author of faith, to thee I lift
My weary, longing eyes:
O let me now receive that gift!
My soul without it dies. 

Surely thou canst not let me die;
O speak, and I shall live!
For here I will unwearied lie,
Till thou thy Spirit give. 

How would my fainting soul rejoice,
Could I but see thy face!
Now let me hear thy quickening voice,
And taste thy pardoning grace! 







https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_i_want_you_to_hold_me.php

Father, I want you to hold me
I want to rest in your arms today
Father, I want you to show me
How much you care for me in every way

I bring all my cares (fears)
And I lay them at your feet
You are always there (here)
And you love me as I am
Yes you love me as I am

Father, I know you will hold me
I know I am your child your own
Father, I know you will show me
I feel your arms holding me I'm not alone

© 1989 Mercy/Vineyard Publishing
CCLI #1596342








https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_if_justly_we_still_claim.php

Father, if justly still we claim
To us and ours the promise made,
To us be graciously the same,
And crown with living fire our head.

Our claim admit, and from above
Of holiness the Spirit shower,
Of wise discernment, humble love,
And zeal, and unity, and power.

The Spirit of convincing speech,
Of power demonstrative, impart,
Such as may every conscience reach,
And sound the unbelieving heart;

The Spirit of refining fire,
Searching the inmost of the mind,
To purge all fierce and foul desire,
And kindle life more pure and kind;

The Spirit of faith, in this thy day,
To break the power of cancelled sin,
Tread down its strength, o'erturn its sway,
And still the conquest more than win.

The Spirit breathe of inward life,
Which in our hearts thy laws may write;
Then grief expires, and pain, and strife:
'Tis nature all, and all delight.




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_in_heaven_in_thy_love_abounding.php

Father in Heaven, in Thy love abounding,
Hear these Thy children through the world resounding,
Lord, in Thy praises thanks for peace abiding,
Ever abiding.

Filled be our hearts with peace beyond comparing,
Peace in Thy world, joy to all heart’s despairing,
Firm is our trust in Thee for peace enduring,
Ever enduring.

God of our fathers, strengthen every nation,
In Thy great peace where only is salvation,
So may the world its future spread before Thee
Thus to adore Thee.




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_in_heaven_who_lovest_all.php

Father in Heaven, Who lovest all,
O help Thy children when they call,
That they may build from age to age
An undefiled heritage.

Teach us to bear the yoke in youth,
With steadfastness and careful truth,
That, in our time, Thy grace may give
The truth whereby the nations live.

Teach us to rule ourselves alway,
Controlled and cleanly night and day,
That we may bring, if need arise,
No maimed or worthless sacrifice.

Teach us to look in all our ends,
On Thee for Judge, and not our friends,
That we, with Thee, may walk uncowed
By fear or favor of the crowd.

Teach us the strength that cannot seek,
By deed or thought, to hurt the weak,
That, under Thee, we may possess
Man’s strength to comfort man’s distress.

Teach us delight in simple things,
And mirth that has no bitter springs,
Forgiveness free of evil done,
And love to all men ’neath the sun.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_in_heaven_whose_love_profound.php

Father of heaven, whose love profound
a ransom for our souls hath found,
before thy throne we sinners bend;
to us thy pardoning love extend.

Almighty Son, Incarnate Word,
our Prophet, Priest, Redeemer, Lord,
before thy throne we sinners bend;
to us thy saving grace extend.

Eternal Spirit, by whose breath
the soul is raised from sin and death,
Before thy throne we sinners bend;
to us thy quickening power extend.

Jehovah - Father, Spirit, Son -
mysterious Godhead, Three in One,
before thy throne we sinners bend;
grace, pardon, life to us extend.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_in_high_heaven_dwelling.php

Father in high Heaven dwelling,
May our evening song be telling
Of Thy mercy large and free:
Through the day Thy love hath fed us,
Through the day Thy care hath led us
With divinest charity.

This day’s sins, O pardon, Savior,
Evil thoughts, perverse behavior,
Envy, pride, and vanity;
From the world, the flesh, deliver,
Save us now, and save us ever,
O Lamb of Calvary!

From enticements of the devil,
From the might of spirits evil,
Be our shield and panoply:
Let Thy pow’r this night defend us,
And a heavenly peace attend us,
And angelic company.

While the night dews are distilling,
Holy Ghost, each heart be filling
With Thine own serenity:
Softly let our eyes be closing
Loving souls on Thee reposing,
Ever blessèd Trinity.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_in_thy_mysterious_presence_kneelling.php
Father, in Whom we live, in Whom we 
          are and move,
          The glory, power and praise receive for Thy creating love.
          Let all the angel throng give thanks to God on high,
          While earth repeats the joyful song and echoes to the sky.

          Incarnate Deity, let all the ransomed race
          Render in thanks their lives to Thee for Thy redeeming grace.
          The grace to sinners showed ye heavenly choirs proclaim,
          And cry “Salvation to our God, salvation to the Lamb!"

          Spirit of Holiness, let all Thy saints adore
          Thy sacred energy, and bless Thine heart renewing power.
          Not angel tongues can tell Thy love’s ecstatic height,
          The glorious joy unspeakable the beatific sight.

          Eternal, Triune God, let all the hosts above,
          Let all on earth below record and dwell upon Thy love.
          When heaven and earth are fled before Thy glorious face,
          Sing all the saints Thy love hath made Thine everlasting praise.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_in_whom_we_live.php

                      Father, in Whom we live, in Whom we are and move,
                      The glory, power and praise receive for Thy creating love.
                      Let all the angel throng give thanks to God on high,
                      While earth repeats the joyful song and echoes to the sky.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_knows_best.php



When you're in a tempting situation
Listening to faulty information
It can be a real complication
If you don't have a heavenly fixation

Chorus:
He can see the future
And He knows what's best
Father knows best
Father knows best
Father knows best
Father knows best

When you're in a tempting situation
Enter into Holy conversation
With the father of the whole creation
He'll see you through that's no exaggeration

Chorus:


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_lead_me_day_by_day.php



Father, lead me day by day,
Ever in Thine own sweet way;
Teach me to be pure and true;
Show me what I ought to do.

When in danger, make me brave,
Make me know that Thou canst save;
Keep me safe by Thy dear side;
Let me in Thy love abide.

When I’m tempted to do wrong,
Make me steadfast, wise and strong;
And when all alone I stand,
Shield me with Thy mighty hand.

When my heart is full of glee,
Help me to remember Thee,
Happy most of all to know
That my Father loves me so.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_let_me_dedicate.php



Father, let me dedicate, all this year to Thee,
In whatever worldly state Thou wilt have me be:
Not from sorrow, pain or care, freedom dare I claim;
This alone shall be my prayer, glorify Thy Name.

Can a child presume to choose where or how to live?
Can a Father’s love refuse all the best to give?
More Thou givest every day than the best can claim
Nor withholdest aught that may glorify Thy Name.

If in mercy Thou wilt spare joys that yet are mine;
If on life, serene and fair, brighter rays may shine;
Let my glad heart, while it sings, Thee in all proclaim,
And, whate’er the future brings, glorify Thy Name.

If Thou callest to the cross, and its shadow come,
Turning all my gain to loss, shrouding heart and home;
Let me think how Thy dear Son to His glory came,
And in deepest woe pray on, “Glorify Thy Name."

Some hymnals alter the last verse to:

If we must in grief and loss Thy behest obey,
If beneath the shadowy cross liest our homeward way;
We will think what Thy dear Son once for us became,
And repeat till life is done, glorify Thy Name.




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_loving_father.php



Father, loving Father,
Hear Thy children’s call;
With Thy love enfold us,
And protect us all.

From the dawn’s first glimmer,
To the close of day
May we feel Thee near us
On our earthly way.

And from evening prayer time
Through the dark of night,
Let us rest in quietness
Until morn brings light.

Teach our tongues to praise Thee
In the hymns we sing;
Teach our hearts to love Thee
As our voices ring.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_make_us_loving.php



Father, make us loving, gentle, thoughtful, kind;
Fill us with Thy Spirit, make us of Thy mind.
Help us love each other, more and more each day,
Help us follow Jesus, in the narrow way.
Refrain

We would learn of Jesus,
Help us here below,
Follow in His footsteps,
Who hath loved us so.

Father, we would ever, live as in Thy sight;
Thou dost know our longings after what is right.
Fill our hearts with kindness as we onward go,
Teach us to be loving, Thou hast loved us so.

Refrain

Help us to remember, Thou art ever near;
Teach us lovingkindness, tenderness and cheer.
There is much of sorrow, in this world below;
Father, make us loving, Thou hast loved us so.

Refrain



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_most_high_be_with_us.php



Father, Most High, be with us,
Unseen, Thy goodness showing,
And Christ the Word Incarnate,
And Spirit grace bestowing.
O Trinity, O Oneness
Of light and power exceeding;
O God of God Eternal
O God, from Both proceeding!

While daylight hours are passing,
We live and work before Thee;
Now, ere we rest in slumber,
We gather to adore Thee.
Our Christian name and calling
Of our new birth remind us;
The Spirit’s gifts and sealing
To firm obedience bind us.

Begone, ye powers of evil
With snares and wiles unholy!
Disturb not with your temptings
The spirits of the lowly.
Depart! for Christ is present,
Beside us, yea, within us;
Away! His sign, ye know it,
The victory shall win us.

Awhile the body resteth;
The spirit, wakeful ever,
Abideth in communion
With Christ, Who sleepeth never,
To God, th’Eternal Father,
To Christ, our sure salvation,
To God, the Holy Spirit,
Be endless adoration.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_most_holy_merciful_and_tender.php

Father most holy, merciful and tender;
Jesus our Savior, with the Father reigning;
Spirit all kindly, Advocate, Defender,
Light never waning;

Trinity sacred, Unity unshaken;
Deity perfect, giving and forgiving,
Light of the angels, Life of the forsaken,
Hope of the living;

Maker of all things, all Thy creatures praise Thee;
Lo, all things serve Thee through Thy whole creation:
Hear us, Almighty, hear us as we raise Thee
Heart’s adoration.

To the all ruling triune God be glory:
Highest and greatest, help Thou our endeavor;
We, too, would praise Thee, giving honor worthy
Now and forever.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_of_all_from_land_and_sea.php

Father of all, from land and sea
The nations sing, “Thine, Lord, are we,
Countless in number, but in Thee
May we be one."

O Son of God, Whose love so free
For men did make Thee Man to be,
United to our God in Thee
May we be one.

Thou, Lord didst once for all atone;
Thee may both Jew and Gentile own
Of their two walls the Corner Stone,
Making them one.

In Thee we are God’s Israel,
Thou art the world’s Emmanuel,
In Thee the saints forever dwell,
Millions but one.

Thou art the Fountain of all good,
Cleansing with Thy most precious blood,
And feeding us with angels’ food,
Making us one.

Join high and low, join young and old
In love that never waxes cold;
Under one Shepherd, in one fold,
Make us all one.

O Spirit blest, Who from above,
Cam’st gently gliding like a dove
Calm all our strife, give faith and love;
O make us one.

O Trinity in Unity,
One only God, in Persons Three,
Dwell ever in our hearts; like Thee
May we be one.

So, when the world shall pass away,
May we awake with joy and say,
“Now in the bliss of endless day
We all are one."



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_of_all_to_thee.php

Father of all, to Thee
With loving hearts we pray,
Through Him, in mercy given,
The Life, the Truth, the Way;
From Heav’n, Thy throne, in mercy shed
Thy blessings on each bended head.

Father of all, to Thee
Our contrite hearts we raise,
Unstrung by sin and pain,
Long voiceless in Thy praise;
Breathe Thou the silent chords along,
Until they tremble into song.

Father of all, to Thee
We breathe unuttered fears,
Deep hidden in our souls,
That have no voice but tears;
Take Thou our hand, and through the wild
Lead gently each trustful child.

Father of all, may we
In praise our tongues employ,
When gladness fills the soul
With deep and hallowed joy;
In storm and calm give us to see
The path of peace which leads to Thee.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_of_all_whose_powerful_voice.php

Father of all, whose powerful voice
Called forth this universal frame,
Whose mercies over all rejoice,
Through endless ages still the same:

Inflame our hearts with perfect love,
In us the work of faith fulfil;
So not heaven's host shall swifter move
Than we on earth, to do thy will.

On thee we cast our care; we live
Through thee, who know'st our every need;
O feed us with thy grace, and give
Our souls this day the living bread.

Eternal, spotless Lamb of God,
Before the world's foundation slain,
Sprinkle us ever with thy blood,
O cleanse, and keep us ever clean!

Giver and Lord of life, whose power
And guardian care for all are free,
To thee, in fierce temptation's hour,
From sin and Satan let us flee.

Thine, Lord, we are, and ours thou art;
In us be all thy goodness showed.
Renew, enlarge, and fill our heart
With peace, and joy, and heaven, and God.

Thrice holy! Thine the kingdom is,
The power omnipotent is thine;
And, when created nature dies,
Thy never-ceasing glories shine.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_of_creation.php

We come into Your presence
To sing a song to You
A song of praise and honour
For all the things You helped us through

You gave us life worth living
A life of love with You
And now I just love giving
All my praises back to You

CHORUS

You are the Father of Creation
The risen Lamb of God
You’re the One who walked away
From the empty tomb that day
And You set Your people free
With love and liberty
And I can walk with You
Every night and every day



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_of_everlasting_grace.php

Father of everlasting grace,
Thy goodness and Thy truth we praise,
Thy goodness and Thy truth we prove;
Thou hast, in honor of Thy Son,
The gift unspeakable sent down,
The Spirit of life, and power and love.

Send us the Spirit of Thy Son,
To make the depths of Godhead known,
To make us share the life divine;
Send Him the sprinkled blood to apply,
Send Him our souls to sanctify,
And show and seal us ever Thine.

So shall we pray, and never cease;
So shall we thankfully confess
Thy wisdom, truth, and power, and love;
With joy unspeakable adore,
And bless and praise Thee evermore,
And serve Thee as Thy hosts above:

Till, added to that heavenly choir,
We raise our songs of triumph higher,
And praise Thee in a nobler strain,
Out-soar the first-born seraph’s flight,
And sing, with all our friends in light,
Thy everlasting love to man.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_of_everlasting_grace.php

Father of everlasting grace,
Thy goodness and Thy truth we praise,
Thy goodness and Thy truth we prove;
Thou hast, in honor of Thy Son,
The gift unspeakable sent down,
The Spirit of life, and power and love.

Send us the Spirit of Thy Son,
To make the depths of Godhead known,
To make us share the life divine;
Send Him the sprinkled blood to apply,
Send Him our souls to sanctify,
And show and seal us ever Thine.

So shall we pray, and never cease;
So shall we thankfully confess
Thy wisdom, truth, and power, and love;
With joy unspeakable adore,
And bless and praise Thee evermore,
And serve Thee as Thy hosts above:

Till, added to that heavenly choir,
We raise our songs of triumph higher,
And praise Thee in a nobler strain,
Out-soar the first-born seraph’s flight,
And sing, with all our friends in light,
Thy everlasting love to man.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_of_glory_to_thy_name.php

Father of glory, to Thy Name,
Immortal praise we give,
Who dost an act of grace proclaim
And bid us rebels live.

Immortal honor to the Son,
Who makes Thine anger cease;
Our lives He ransomed with His own
And died to make our peace.

To Thine almighty Spirit be
Immortal glory giv’n,
Whose teachings bring us near to Thee
And train us up for Heav’n.

Let men with their united voice
Adore th’eternal God
And spread His honors and their joys
Through nations far abroad.

Let faith and love and duty join
One grateful song to raise;
Let saints in earth and Heav’n combine
In harmony and praise.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_of_heaven.php

Father of Heaven, Whose love profound
A ransom for our souls hath found,
Before Thy throne we sinners bend;
To us Thy pardoning love extend.

Almighty Son, Incarnate Word,
Our Prophet, Priest, Redeemer, Lord,
Before Thy throne we sinners bend;
To us Thy saving grace extend.

Eternal Spirit, by Whose breath
The soul is raised from sin and death,
Before Thy throne we sinners bend;
To us Thy quickening power extend.

Jehovah—Father, Spirit, Son—
Mysterious Godhead, Three in One,
Before Thy throne we sinners bend;
Grace, pardon, life to us extend.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_of_jesus_christ_my_lord.php

Father of Jesus Christ, my Lord,
My Savior and my Head;
I trust in Thee, Whose powerful Word
Hath raised Him from the dead.

In hope, against all human hope,
Self desperate, I believe;
Thy quickening Word shall raise me up,
Thou shalt Thy Spirit give.

Faith, mighty faith, the promise sees,
And looks to that alone;
Laughs at impossibilities,
And cries, “It shall be done!"

To Thee the glory of Thy power
And faithfulness I give;
I shall in Christ, at that glad hour,
And Christ in me shall live.

Obedient faith that waits on Thee,
Thou never wilt reprove;
Bt Thou wilt form Thy Son in me,
And perfect me in love.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_of_lights.php

Father of lights, in Whom there is no shadow,
Giver of every good and perfect gift!
With one accord we seek Thy holy presence,
Gladly our hearts to Thee in praise we lift.

Glad for the cause that binds our lives together,
Through Thee united, worshiping as one;
Glad for the crowning gift that Thou hast given,
Sending, to light the world, Thine only Son.

Light of the world, through Whom we know the Father!
Pour out upon us Thine abiding love,
That we may know its depth and height and splendor,
That heaven may come to earth from heaven above.

Thou art the Christ! To Thee we own allegiance.
May our devotion sweep from sea to sea,
Even as we, the gift from Thee receiving,
Joyfully minister that gift for Thee.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_of_love.php

Father of love, our Guide and Friend,
O lead us gently on,
Until life’s trial time shall end,
And heav’nly peace be won.

We know not what the path may be
As yet by us untrod;
But we can trust our all to Thee,
Our Father and our God.

If called, like Abraham’s child, to climb
The hill of sacrifice,
Some angel may be there in time;
Deliverance shall arise.

Or, if some darker lot be good,
O teach us to endure
The sorrow, pain or solitude,
That makes the spirit pure.

Christ by no flowery pathway came;
And we, His followers here,
Must do Thy will and praise Thy Name,
In hope, and love and fear.

And, till in Heav’n we sinless bow,
And faultless anthems raise,
O Father, Son, and Spirit, now,
Accept our feeble praise.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_of_love_and_power.php

Father of love and power,
Guard Thou our evening hour,
Shield with Thy might;
For all Thy care this day
Our grateful thanks we pay,
And to our Father pray,
Bless us tonight!

Jesus, Emmanuel,
Come, in Thy love to dwell
In hearts contrite.
For all our sins we grieve,
But we Thy grace receive,
And in Thy Word believe;
Bless us tonight!

Spirit of holiness,
Gentle, transforming, grace,
Indwelling Light!
Soothe Thou each weary breast,
Now let Thy peace possessed
Calm us to perfect rest;
Bless us tonight!
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_of_love_of_justice_and_of_mercy.php

Father of love, of justice and of mercy,
Thou art the dawn, the star at eventide;
Show Thou Thy face, and light my way to Calv’ry,
There all my sins in Thee to hide.
I bring Thee all my sins,
None can forgive but Thee.
Refrain

I bring Thee all, I bring Thee all;
O, give Thyself to me, I bring Thee all.

O Thou, of Whom the heav’ns are but a symbol,
Be Thou the sun that draws my heart to Thee;
Be Thou the light the stars at night do kindle,
Thy love is more than all to me.
I bring Thee all my heart,
None do I love like Thee.

Refrain

O Man of Sorrows, praying in the garden,
Thy sweat as blood falls down upon the ground.
In that dark agony my sins are pardoned;
My solace in Thy grief is found.
I bring Thee all my tears,
None can console like Thee.

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_of_me_and_all_mankind.php

Father of me, and all mankind,
And all the hosts above,
Let every understanding mind
Unite to praise Thy love.

To know Thy nature, and Thy Name,
One God in Persons three;
And glorify the great I AM,
Through all eternity.

Thy kingdom come, with power and grace,
To every heart of man;
Thy peace, and joy, and righteousness,
In all our bosoms reign.

The righteousness that never ends,
But makes an end of sin,
The joy that human thought transcends
Into our souls bring in:

The kingdom of established peace,
Which can no more remove;
The perfect power of godliness,
The omnipotence of love.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_of_men_in_whom_are_one.php

Father of men, in Whom are one
All humankind beneath Thy sun,
Stablish our work in Thee begun.
Except the house be built of Thee,
In vain the builder’s toil must be:
O strengthen our infirmity.

Man lives not for himself alone,
In others’ good he finds his own;
Life’s worth in fellowship is known.
We, friends and comrades on life’s way,
Gather within these walls to pray:
Bless Thou our fellowship today.

O Christ, our Elder Brother, Who
By serving man God’s will didst do,
Help us to serve our brethren, too.
Guide us to seek the things above,
The base to shun, the pure approve,
To live by Thy free law of love.

In all our work, in all our play,
Be with us, Lord, our Friend, our Stay;
Lead onward to the perfect day:
Then may we know, earth’s lesson o’er,
With comrades missed or gone before,
Heav’n’s fellowship for evermore.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_of_mercies_in_thy_word.php

Father of mercies, in Thy Word
What endless glory shines!
Forever be Thy Name adored
For these celestial lines.

Here may the wretched sons of want
Exhaustless riches find;
Riches above what earth can grant,
And lasting as the mind.

Here the fair tree of knowledge grows
And yields a free repast;
And richer fruits than nature shows
Invite the longing taste.

Amidst these gloomy wilds below,
When dark and sad we stray,
Here beams of Heaven relieve our woe,
And guide to endless day.

Here springs of consolation rise
To cheer the fainting mind,
And thirsty souls receive supplies,
And sweet refreshment find.

Here the Redeemer’s welcome voice
Spreads heavenly peace around
And life and everlasting joys
Attend the blissful sound.

Oh, may these hallowed pages be
Our joy by day and night,
And still new beauties may we see,
And still increasing light.

Divine Instructor, gracious Lord,
O grant our fervent prayer,
Teach us to love Thy sacred Word,
And view the Savior there.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_of_mercies_god_of_love.php

Father of mercies! God of love!
Whose kind compassion still we prove,
Our praise accept, and bless us here,
As brought to this—another year.

We sing Thy goodness all divine,
Whose radiant beams around us shine,
’Tis through Thy goodness we appear
Preserved to this—another year.

Our souls, our all we here resign;
Make us, and keep us ever Thine;
And grant that in Thy love and fear
We may begin—another year.

Be this our sweet experience still,
To know and do Thy holy will;
Then shall our souls, with joy sincere,
Bless Thee for this—another year.

Still, Lord, through life Thy love display,
And then in death’s approaching day,
We’ll joyful part with all that’s here,
Nor wish on earth—another year.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_of_peace_god_of_love.php

Father of peace, and God of love,
We own Thy pow’r to save,
That pow’r by which our Shepherd rose
Victorious o’er the grave.

Him from the dead Thou brought’st again,
When by His sacred blood,
Confirmed and sealed forevermore
Th’eternal cov’nant stood.

O may Thy Spirit seal our souls,
And mold them to Thy will,
That our weak hearts no more may stray,
But keep Thy cov’nant still.

That all we think and all we do
Be pleasing in Thy sight,
Through Jesus Christ, to Whom be praise
In endless glory bright.




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_of_spirits_whose_divine_controls.php

Father of spirits, Whose divine control
Doth bind the soul and body into one;
Thou wilt restore this body now undone;
For once it was the mansion of a soul,
Where dwelt the glowing wisdom of Thy Son.

Thou, Maker of the body, dost ordain
That this Thine image, molded by Thy will,
Our every hope in glory shall fulfill;
So, till the body Thou dost build again,
Thou wilt preserve the spirit freed from ill.

In that blest region shall this spirit dwell
Where flowers undying bloom on every side:
For lo, we trust Thy Word, O Crucified,
When in Thy triumph over death and hell,
The thief forgiven took Thee for his Guide.

Our brother goeth by the shining way,
That ever to the faithful open lies:
Lord, train Thy servant now in Paradise,
And bless him in his fatherland, we pray,
Till Thou shalt bid his body to arise.

or

Our sister goeth by the shining way,
That ever to the faithful open lies:
Lord, train Thy servant now in Paradise,
And bless her in her fatherland, we pray,
Till Thou shalt bid her body to arise.




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_our_hearts_we_lift.php

Father, our hearts we lift,
Up to Thy gracious throne,
And bless Thee for the precious gift,
Of Thine incarnate Son;
The gift unspeakable,
We thankfully receive,
And to the world Thy goodness tell,
And to Thy glory live.

Jesus the holy Child,
Doth by His birth declare,
That God and men are reconciled,
And one in Him we are;
Salvation through His Name
To all mankind is giv’n,
And loud His infant cries proclaim
A peace ’twixt earth and Heav’n.

A peace on earth He brings,
Which never more shall end;
The Lord of hosts, the King of kings,
Declares Himself our Friend;
Assumes our flesh and blood,
That we His Spirit may gain;
The everlasting Son of God,
The mortal Son of man.

His kingdom from above,
He doth to us impart,
And pure benevolence and love,
O’erflow the faithful heart;
Changèd in a moment we
The sweet attraction find,
With open arms of charity
Embracing all mankind.

O might they all receive,
The new-born Prince of Peace,
And meekly in His Spirit live,
And in His love increase!
Till He convey us home,
Cry every soul aloud,
“Come, Thou Desire of nations, come,
And take us up to God."



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_please.php

Words and music: Kevin Percival © 1996 Anthony K. Music (ASCAP)

Lyrics: 

Father, please (please) send your love down to me
Like a breeze (breeze), blowing soothing release
Love (love) that has set my soul free, Father, please (please) 

Father, please (please) send your Spirit to me
Never cease (cease) to inspire me
The love (love) that will always bring peace, Father, please (please) 

Chorus:
In the presence of your holiness
Though the prayer I always pray
Understanding my unworthiness and the price you had to pay
I forever give my all to you through the gift I always bring
I will give you all the praise that's due through the voice I use to sing 

Father, please send your love down to me
Father, please send your Spirit to me 

Father, please (please) send your love down to me
Like a breeze (breeze), blowing soothing release
Love (love) that has set my soul free, Father, please (please) 

Father, please (please) send your Spirit to me
Never cease (cease) to inspire me
The love (love) that will always bring peace, Father, please (please) 

Repeat Chorus 

Father, please send your love down to me
Father, please, love that always brings peace
Father, please send your Spirit to me
Father, please, Father set my soul free
Father, please 



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_son_and_holy_ghost.php

Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
In solemn power come down!
Present with Thy heavenly host,
Thine ordinance to crown:
See a sinful worm of earth!
Bless to him the cleansing flood,
Plunge him, by a second birth,
Into the depths of God.

Let the promised inward grace
Accompany the sign;
On his new-born soul impress
The character divine;
Father, all Thy Name reveal!
Jesus, all Thy Name impart!
Holy Ghost, renew, and dwell
For ever in his heart!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_thou_art_calling.php

Father, Thou art calling, calling to us plainly;
To the spirit comes Thy loving message evermore;
Holy One, uplift us, nor forever vainly
Stand calling us and waiting at the door.

In the whirling tempest and the storm Thou livest,
In the rain, and in the sweetness of the afterglow;
Summer’s golden bounty, winter’s snow, Thou givest,
And blooming meadows where sweet waters flow.

Clearer still and dearer is Thy voice appealing,
Deep within the spirit’s secret being speaking low:
Enter, O our Father! truth and life revealing;
From every evil free us as we go.

In Thee living, moving, unto Thee uprearing
All the hope and joyfulness and trust that fill the soul,
Father, we adore Thee, asking naught nor fearing;
We cannot wander from Thy dear control.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_to_thee_i_come.php

Father, to thee I come,
owning how weak I am,
grant thy sustaining arm; lead me, I pray.

More of thy love I'd have;
nearer to thee would live;
earnest heart service give, day after day.

In the straight narrow path,
thou bidd'st me walk by faith;
O grant the grace that hath aided alway.

When I shall tempted be,
nothing but clouds can see,
strengthen my trust in thee; let me not stray.

When comes that final night,
ere faith is changed to sight,
be thou the perfect light, leading to day.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_to_thee_we_look_in_all_our_sorrow.php

Father, to Thee we look in all our sorrow,
Thou art the Fountain whence our healing flows;
Dark though the night, joy cometh with the morrow;
Safely they rest who on Thy love repose.

When fond hopes fail and skies are dark before us,
When the vain cares that vex our lives increase,
Comes with its calm the thought that Thou art o’er us,
And we grow quiet, folded in Thy peace.

Naught shall affright us, on Thy goodness leaning;
Low in the heart faith singeth still her song;
Chastened by pain we learn life’s deeper meaning,
And in our weakness Thou dost make us strong.

Patient, O heart, though heavy be Thy sorrows;
Be not cast down, disquieted in vain;
Yet shalt thou praise Him, when these darkened furrows,
Where now He plougheth, wave with golden grain.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_we_come.php

Father, we come, with youth and vigor pressing,

gladly to serve, our loyalty to own;
grant that we may, thy holy Name confessing,
know thy Son Christ, and seek to make him known.

Be with us, Lord; we kneel in supplication,
in bonds of fellowship before thy throne;
by fervent prayer, by willing consecration,
help us to know the Christ and make him known.

Feed us, 0 Lord, that we may rise victorious,
filled with the power that comes from tbee alone,
inspired with zeal to face life's challenge glorious,
eager to know the Christ and make him known.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_we_praise_thee.php

Father, we praise Thee, now the night is over;
Active and watchful, stand we all before Thee;
Singing, we offer, prayer and meditation;
Thus we adore Thee.

Monarch of all things, fit us for Thy mansions;
Banish our weakness, health and wholeness sending;
Bring us to Heaven, where Thy saints united
Joy without ending.

All holy Father, Son and equal Spirit,
Trinity blessèd, send us Thy salvation;
Thine is the glory, gleaming and resounding
Through all creation.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_whateer_of_earthly_bliss.php

Father, whate’er of earthly bliss
Thy sovereign will denies,
Accepted at Thy throne, let this
My humble prayer, arise:

Give me a calm and thankful heart,
From every murmur free;
The blessing of Thy grace impart,
And make me live to Thee.

Let the sweet hope that Thou art mine
My life and death attend,
Thy presence through my journey shine,
And crown my journey’s end.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_when_shall_all_the_weary_earth.php

Father, when shall all the weary earth
Cease from sighing and ring out its mirth?
Triumph in its grand, immortal birth,
Into wondrous life with God.
Refrain

Christ is coming as the King of kings;
Shout, ye ransomed, o’er the grace He brings;
Hark! the whole earth with the welcome rings,
Hallelujah, praise His Name!

Savior, when shall my poor sinful soul
On Thee all its sins and sorrow roll?
Know Thy full salvation and be whole?
When, my Jesus, wilt Thou come?

Refrain

Enter now upon Thy glorious reign!
Come and raise to life what sin hath slain!
O’er my heart and o’er the world regain
Thy dominion! Jesus, come!

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_who_art_alone.php

Father, Who art alone
Our Helper and our Stay;
O hear us! as we plead
For loved ones far away;
And shield with Thine almighty hand
Our wanderers by sea and land.

O compass with Thy love
The daily path they tread!
And may Thy light and truth
Upon their hearts be shed;
That, one in all things with Thy will,
Heav’n’s peace and joy their souls may fill.

Guard them from every harm
When dangers shall assail,
And teach them that Thy power
Can never, never fail;
We cannot with our loved ones be,
But trust them, Father, unto Thee.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_who_doth_thy_children_feed.php

Father, Who dost Thy children feed
With manna rainèd from above;
Who dost the saving chalice give,
Filled by Thy hand in wondrous love:
We praise Thee for Thy mercies sent
To us in this great sacrament.

O Word made flesh, Whom we adore,
The living Bread sent down from Heav’n,
Whose wondrous passion here shown forth
Is the great pledge of sin forgiven;
We praise Thee for Thy mercies sent
To us in this great sacrament.

O Holy Spirit, Who dost reign
These earthly elements to bless,
Making the bread His flesh to be,
The wine His blood, as we confess;
We praise Thee for Thy mercies sent
To us in this great sacrament.

Ye holy angels, who, with us,
Around God’s altar lowly bow,
Adoring there the Crucified,
Whose precious death is pleaded now,
O praise Him for His mercies sent
To us in this great sacrament!

Ye blessèd saints, enthroned on high,
Who once the paths of earth did tread,
Who reached in safety God’s abode,
As strengthened by this living bread;
O praise Him for His mercies sent
To us in this great sacrament!

O Holy Father, Holy Son,
And Holy Spirit, Whom we love,
Guide, strengthen, save us here below,
And bring us to our home above,
To praise Thee for Thy mercies sent
To us in this great sacrament!


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_who_hast_gathered.php

Father, Who hast gathered
This dear child to rest,
Unto Thee we yield him,
Sure Thou knowest best.

Thou, O Lord, Who gavest,
Dost Thine own reclaim;
Thou, O Lord, hast taken—
Blessèd still Thy Name!

Thine by right creative,
By redemption Thine,
By regeneration
And the holy sign.

Thou Who didst endow him
With baptismal grace,
Now in love hast brought him
To behold Thy face.

Safe from all earth’s sorrow,
Safe from all its pains,
Now this child of Adam,
Paradise regains:

Safe from all temptation,
Safe from fear of sin,
Through the blood of sprinkling
Holy, bright and clean.

Lay we this dear body
In the earth to sleep,
His sweet soul commending
Unto Thee to keep:

Looking for the dawning
Of that deathless day,
When all earthly shadows
Shall have fled away.

Only grant us, Father,
Courage in our strife,
And with him a portion
In unending life.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_who_on_man_dost_shower.php

Father, Who on man dost shower
Gifts of plenty from Thy dower,
To Thy people give the power
All Thy gifts to use aright.

Give pure happiness in leisure,
Temperance in every pleasure,
Holy use of earthly treasure,
Bodies clear and spirits bright.

Lift from this and every nation
All that brings us degradation;
Quell the forces of temptation;
Put Thine enemies to flight.

Be with us, Thy strength supplying,
That with energy undying,
Every foe of man defying,
We may rally to the fight.

Thou Who art our Captain ever,
Lead us on to great endeavor;
May Thy Church the world deliver:
Give us wisdom, courage, might.

Father, Who has sought and loved us,
Son of God, Whose love has bound us,
Holy Ghost, within us, round us—
Hear us, Godhead infinite.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_who_the_light_this_day.php

Father, Who the light this day
Out of darkness didst create,
Shine upon us now, we pray,
While within Thy courts we wait.
Wean us from the works of night,
Make us children of the light.

Savior, Who this day didst break
The dark prison of the tomb,
Bid our slumbering souls awake,
Shine through all their sin and gloom.
Let us, from our bonds set free,
Rise from sin and live to Thee.

Blessèd Spirit, Comforter,
Sent this day from Christ on high,
Lord, on us Thy gifts confer,
Cleanse, illumine, sanctify.
All Thy fullness shed abroad;
Lead us to the truth of God


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_whose_creating_hand.php

Father, Whose creating hand
Made the ocean and the land;
All Thy creatures are Thy care,
Thou art present everywhere.
Hear us, we beseech Thee.

Christ, Who didst of old appear
On the waters, drawing near;
Thou art able still to save,
Calmly ruling wind and wave.
Hear us, we beseech Thee.

Holy Ghost, Whose presence shed
Life where all was dark and dead,
By Thy breath we move and live,
Thou dost light and order give.
Hear us, we beseech Thee.

God, to Whom our life we owe,
God, Whose blood for man did flow,
God, Who dost within us dwell,
Keep us Thine, and all is well.
Hear us, we beseech Thee.

When the deep in slumber lies
Under bright and peaceful skies,
When the winds in fury rave,
Lifting high the rushing wave,
Hear us, we beseech Thee.

All our honest labor bless,
Give each lawful aim success;
In our time of need draw nigh,
Saying, “Fear not, it is I."
Hear us, we beseech Thee.

Guard the loves ones left behind,
Give them peace in heart and mind;
Keep us all in union sweet,
At our Father’s mercy seat.
Hear us, we beseech Thee.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_whose_everlasting_love.php

Father, Whose everlasting love
Thy only Son for sinners gave,
Whose grace to all did freely move,
And sent Him down the world to save;

Help us Thy mercy to extol,
Immense, unfathomed, unconfined;
To praise the Lamb who died for all,
The general Savior of mankind.

Thy undistinguishing regard
Was cast on Adam’s fallen race;
For all Thou hast in Christ prepared
Sufficient, sovereign, saving grace.

The world He suffered to redeem;
For all He hath the atonement made;
For those that will not come to Him
The ransom of His life was paid.

Why then, Thou universal Love,
Should any of Thy grace despair?
To all, to all, Thy bowels move,
But straitened in our own we are.

Arise, O God, maintain Thy cause!
The fullness of the Gentiles call;
Lift up the standard of Thy cross,
And all shall own Thou diedst for all.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_whose_love_we_have_wronged.php

Father, Whose love we have wronged by transgression
Christ, Who wast nailed for our sins on the tree,
Spirit, Who givest the grace of repentance;
Hear us, we pray Thee, good Lord. 

Jesu, adorable Savior of sinners,
Author of penitence, Hope of our souls,
Plentiful Fountain of grace and compassion;
Hear us, we pray Thee, good Lord.

Thou Who didst empty Thyself of Thy glory,
Thou Who Thy parents on earth didst obey,
Thou Who for our sake enduredst temptation,
Hear us, we pray Thee, good Lord.

Thou Who hast shown us the love of the Father,
Meeting with mercy the prodigal son,
Sonship and home to the lost one restoring,
Hear us, we pray Thee, good Lord.

Jesu, Who once by the well to the sinner
Clearly the sins of her heart did reveal,
Leading her gently to faith and repentance,
Hear us, we pray Thee, good Lord.

Thou Who didst enter the house of Zaccheus,
Blessing his faith and accepting his love,
When for wrongdoing he made restitution,
Hear us, we pray Thee, good Lord.

Christ, with the Twelve the last Passover keeping,
Ere on the cross the true Lamb should be slain,
Sacrifice offered for all and for ever,
Hear us, we pray Thee, good Lord.

Jesu, alone with the blood-sweat upon Thee,
Jesu, in agony bowed to the earth,
Jesu, Thy will to the Father resigning,
Hear us, we pray Thee, good Lord.

Jesu, from Annas to Caiaphas hurried,
Blindfolded, stricken, and falsely accused,
Rudely blasphemed, and declared a blasphemer,
Hear us, we pray Thee, good Lord.

Jesu, denied by Thine eager Apostle,
Whom with a look Thou didst straightway recall,
Moving him straightway to tears and contrition;
Hear us, we pray Thee, good Lord.

Thou Who wast wounded to heal our transgression,
Lifted on high to draw all men to Thee,
There on the cross in Thy majesty reigning,
Hear us, we pray Thee, good Lord.

That Thou wouldst draw us to heartfelt contrition,
That Thou wouldst help us our sins to confess,
That Thou wouldst grant us the grace of amendment,
Hear us, we pray Thee, good Lord.

That we may bring forth works meet for repentance,
That we give place to the devil no more,
That Thou wouldst lead us to sure perseverance,
Hear us, we pray Thee, good Lord.





https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_whose_will_is_life_and_good.php

Father, Whose will is life and good
For all of mortal breath,
Bind strong the bond of brotherhood
Of those who fight with death.

Empower the hands and hearts and wills
Of friends both near and far,
Who battle with the body’s ills
And wage Your holy war.

Where’er they heal the maimed and blind,
Let love of Christ attend:
Proclaim the good Physician’s mind,
And prove the Savior friend.

For still His love works wondrous charms,
And, as in days of old,
He takes the wounded to His arms,
And bears them to the fold.

O Father, look from Heav’n and bless
Whate’er Your servants do,
Their works of pure unselfishness,
Made consecrate to You.





https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_you_alone.php

Father, You alone are my reward
Father, You alone are my salvation
Even though I walk into the fire
You will shelter me with Your great love
Oh Father, I will trust in You
Oh Father, I will trust in You

Oh Your Holy Spirit comforts me
Your unfailing love restores my soul
And Your word is like a soothing fire
To refine my heart and make me whole
Oh Father, I will trust in You
Oh Father, I will trust in You

CHORUS:
Yah, Yahwe-eh-yah, Yahwe-eh
I will trust You I will follow
Yah, Yahwe-eh-yah, Yahwe-eh

©1994, 1999 Mercy / Vineyard Publishing
Words and Music by David Viglianti




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/father_who_on_man_dost_shower.php

Father, Who on man dost shower
Gifts of plenty from Thy dower,
To Thy people give the power
All Thy gifts to use aright.

Give pure happiness in leisure,
Temperance in every pleasure,
Holy use of earthly treasure,
Bodies clear and spirits bright.

Lift from this and every nation
All that brings us degradation;
Quell the forces of temptation;
Put Thine enemies to flight.

Be with us, Thy strength supplying,
That with energy undying,
Every foe of man defying,
We may rally to the fight.

Thou Who art our Captain ever,
Lead us on to great endeavor;
May Thy Church the world deliver:
Give us wisdom, courage, might.

Father, Who has sought and loved us,
Son of God, Whose love has bound us,
Holy Ghost, within us, round us—
Hear us, Godhead infinite.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fathers_eyes.php

Words and music: Gary Chapman © 1978 Paragon Music Corp (ASCAP)

Lyrics: 

I may not be ev'ry mother's dream for her little girl
My face may not grace the mind of everyone in the world
But that's alright; as long as I can have one wish, I pray
When people look inside my life, I wanna hear them say 

Chorus:
She's got her father's eyes (father's eyes)
Her father's eyes (father's eyes)
Eyes that found the good in things
When good was not around
Eyes that found a source of help
When help could not be found
Eyes full of compassion (strong compassion)
Seein' everything
Knowin' what you're goin' thru
And feelin' it the same 

Just like my Father's eyes (she's got the look of Jesus)
My Father's eyes (she's got the look of Jesus)
My Father's eyes (she's got the look)
Just like my Father's eyes 

On that day when we will pay for all the deeds we have done
Good and bad they'll all be had to see by everyone
And when you're called to stand and tell just what you saw in me
More than anything I know, I want your words to be 

Repeat Chorus 

Just like my Father's eyes (she's got the look of Jesus)
My Father's eyes (she's got the look of Jesus)
My Father's eyes (she's got the look)
Just like my Father's eyes (she's got the look of Jesus)
My Father's eyes (she's got the look of Jesus)
My Father's eyes (she's got the look)
Just like my Father's eyes


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fathers_playing_ground.php

In this modernistic day,
Some have strayed too far away
From our father’s camp meeting, praying ground;
We used to fast and pray all day,
And ask the Lord to have His way,
Back there on our father’s praying ground. 

Refrain:
Let us go back to our father’s praying ground,
God is not pleased, let us go back on bended knees;
Too far away some have strayed,
Just now and then a soul is saved;
Let us go back to our father’s praying ground. 

Through the country we would ride,
With our children by our side,
Traveling through the storm and rain just the same;
Going to the house of the Lord,
Where we would bow in sweet accord,
Singing, “Come, ye that love the Lord, in Jesus’ name." 

The old preacher could hardly read,
Still what he said sinners took heed,
And would steal away and bow down;
Sometimes beside an old oak tree,
One would cry, “He spoke peace to me,"
Just before day on our father’s praying ground.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fathers_table_grace.php

As we sat at the table, 
Our family's heads bowed low
My thoughts returned to childhood
And the finest man I know
He doesn't speak good English
He's just a simple man
But when he's talking to the Lord
Even a little child can understand
I was young and reckless
But the thought still comes to me
When I told my dad I felt, 
I was old enough to leave. 
He sat there at the table, 
And a look came on his face, 
And he never spoke another word, 
'Til he said the table grace. 
He said, "Our Gracious, Heavenly Father, 
We're all gathered here today, 
To give Thee thanks for blessings, 
So humbly we pray. 
My oldest son is leaving, 
But I'm sure he knows what's best; 
But just in case, would you stand by 
And help him stand the test? 
And if he gets with the wrong crowd, 
Would you let him hold your arm? 
And if he flies too high, 
Would you clip his wings? 
But don't let him fall too hard, 
I'm sure Lord, You can handle things. 
I've tried by best from day to day, 
To teach him right from wrong, 
An he's grown go be a fine young man, 
And he's always blessed our home. 
We pray Thee, Lord, for guidance, 
That he won't build upon sand, 
But we won't worry half as much, 
If we know he's in your hands. 
And, oh, oh yes, Lord, it won't be long 
'Til I'll be coming home. 
Don't make me wait too long. 
We pray Thee, Lord, for guidance, 
Please cleanse us from our sins, 
So we can all be together in Heaven, 
In Jesus' name, Amen." 
The table was silent
As tears ran down my face, 
And from that day on
I based my life, 
On Father's Table Grace. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fear_not_little_flock.php

Fear not, little flock, from the cross to the throne,
From death into life He went for His own;
All power in earth, all power above,
Is given to Him for the flock of His love.
Refrain

Only believe, only believe;
All things are possible, only believe,
Only believe, only believe;
All things are possible, only believe.

Fear not, little flock, He goeth ahead,
Your Shepherd selecteth the path you must tread;
The waters of Marah He’ll sweeten for thee,
He drank all the bitter in Gethsemane.

Refrain

Fear not, little flock, whatever your lot,
He enters all rooms, “the doors being shut,"
He never forsakes; He never is gone,
So count on His presence in darkness and dawn.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fear_not_o_little_flock.php

Fear not, O little flock, the foe
Who madly seeks your overthrow;
Dread not his rage and power;
What though your courage sometimes faints?
His seeming triumph o’er God’s saints
Lasts but a little hour.

Fear not, be strong! your cause belongs
To Him Who can avenge your wrongs;
Leave all to Him, your Lord;
Though hidden yet from mortal eyes,
Salvation shall for you arise;
He girdeth on His sword!

As true as God’s own promise stands,
Not earth nor hell with all their bands
Against us shall prevail;
The Lord shall mock them from His throne;
God is with us; we are His own;
Our victory cannot fail!

Amen, Lord Jesus, grant our prayer!
Great Captain, now thine arm make bare;
Thy church with strength defend;
So shall thy saints and martyrs raise
A joyful chorus to Thy praise,
Through ages without end.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fear_not_thou_christian_flock.php

Fear not, thou faithful Christian flock;
God is thy shelter and thy rock;
Fear not for thy salvation.
Though fierce the foe and dark the night,
The Lord of hosts shall be thy might,
Christ thine illumination.

Arise, arise, the foe defy!
Call on the Name of God most high,
That He with might endue you.
And Christ, your everlasting Priest,
In all your conflicts shall assist,
From strength to strength renew you.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fearless_and_faithful_trusting_in_thee.php


Fearless and faithful, trusting and true,
Loyal to Jesus, in all I do;
Seeking His glory, loving His laws,
Ready and willing to honor His cause.
Refrain

So would I ever
Walk in His ways,
Bearing His standard,
Shouting His praise.

Fearless and faithful, strong in the Lord,
Firm as an anchor, my hope His Word;
Over the conflicts, raging within,
Victory promised thro’ grace I shall win.

Refrain

Fearless and faithful, earnest in prayer,
Living for others, their burdens share;
Cheering the lowly, poor and oppressed,
Pointing to Jesus, the Giver of rest.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/feasting_with_my_lor.php

Since my soul is saved and sanctified,
Feasting, I知 feasting,
In this land of Canaan I値l abide,
Feasting with my Lord. 

Refrain

Feasting, I am feasting,
Feasting with my Lord;
I知 feasting, I am feasting,
On the living Word.

Feeding on the honey and the wine,
Feasting, I知 feasting,
Gathering the clusters from the vine,
Feasting with my Lord.

Refrain

Day by day we have a new supply,
Feasting, I知 feasting,
And the food is never stale or dry,
Feasting with my Lord.

Refrain

Many times we have an extra spread,
Feasting, I知 feasting,
When to deeper truths I have been led,
Feasting with my Lord.

Refrain

Often there are only just we two,
Feasting, I知 feasting,
Then He tells me what He壇 have me do,
Feasting with my Lord.

Refrain

If perchance the cupboard痴 scarce of bread,
Feasting, I知 feasting,
On the hidden manna I am fed,
Feasting with my Lord.

Refrain



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fed_upon_the_finest_of_the_wheat.php

Hungry, Lord, for Thy Word of truth,
Sitting at my Savior’s feet;
Rising, gleaning, just like Ruth,
Feed me on the finest of the wheat.
Refrain

Bread of life it is now to me,
Honey, milk and meat;
In Thy love I will ever be
Fed upon the finest of the wheat.

Work for the Master I will do,
Trusting in His strength so great;
Living in His pastures new,
Feed me on the finest of the wheat.

Refrain

Then to the harvest let us go,
Bugles sounding no retreat;
Workers for Jesus, He wants you
Fed upon the finest of the wheat.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/feet_on_the_rock.php

Chorus 1
I put my feet on the rock
And my name on the roll


And when it’s called up yonder
I won’t worry about my soul
I know my home is waitin’
And it’s somethin’ to behold
I put my feet on the rock
And my name on the roll


Verse
I’d never heard the gospel
Spread like that before
I guess the message comes in many ways


Those simple words of wisdom
Can open Heaven’s door
So every time I get the chance I say


Chorus 2
Come on, put your feet on the rock
And your name on the roll


So when it’s called up yonder
You won’t worry about your soul
You know your home is waiting
And it’s something to behold
So put your feet on the rock
And your name on the roll


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fierce_raged_the_tempest.php

Fierce raged the tempest o’er the deep,
Watch did Thine anxious servants keep
But Thou wast wrapped in guileless sleep,
Calm and still.

“Save, Lord, we perish," was their cry,
“O save us in our agony!"
Thy word above the storm rose high,
“Peace, be still."

The wild winds hushed; the angry deep
Sank, like a little child, to sleep;
The sullen billows ceased to leap,
At Thy will.

So, when our life is clouded o’er,
And storm winds drift us from the shore,
Say, lest we sink to rise no more,
“Peace, be still."




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fierce_was_the_billow_wild.php

Fierce was the billow wild, dark was the night;
Oars labored heavily, foam glimmered white.
Trembled the mariners; peril was nigh:
Then said the God of God, “Peace: it is I."

Ridge of the mountain wave, lower thy crest;
Wail of the tempest wind, be thou at rest.
Sorrow can never be, darkness must fly,
Where saith the Light of light, “Peace: it is I."

Jesus, Deliverer, near to us be;
Soothe thou my voyaging over life’s sea;
Thou, when the storm of death roars, sweeping by,
Whisper, O Truth of truth, “Peace: it is I."




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fierce_was_the_storm_of_wind.php

Fierce was the storm of wind,
The surging waves ran high,
Failed the disciples’ hearts with fear,
Tho’ Thou, their Lord, wast nigh.

But at the stern rebuke,
Of Thy almighty word,
The wind was hushed, the billows ceased,
And owned Thee God and Lord.

So now, when depths of sin,
Our souls with terrors fill,
Arise, and be our Helper, Lord,
And speak Thy “Peace, be still."

When death’s dark sea we cross,
Be with us in Thy power,
Nor let the water floods prevail
In that dread trial hour.

And, when amid the sighs,
Which speak Thine Advent near,
The roaring of the sea and waves
Fills faithless hearts with fear;

May we all undismayed
The raging tempests see,
Lift up our head and hail with joy
Thy great Epiphany.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/firey_darts.php

In the hour of sore temptation I may be,
Yet, amid the trials, Jesus’ face I see;
In His word my anchor holdeth to the last,
While the fiery darts are flying thick and fast. 

Refrain:
We shall not be wounded in the hottest fight
If we raise the shield of faith in Jesus’ might;
Through the grace of God we’ll conquer to the last,
While the fiery darts are flying thick and fast. 

In the greatest suff’ring man may undergo,
He shall have the vict’ry if he’ll count it so;
Conqu’ring in the conflict, soon ’twill all be past,
Though the fiery darts are flying think and fast. 

Should I walk in trouble, pressed on every side,
He who knows my weakness will with me abide;
I will ever trust Him in the hottest blast,
While the fiery darts are flying thick and fast. 

In the heated furnace, Father, let me stay,
Precious gold refining, purge the dross away,
Till Thy glorious image is reflected there,
Till the costly jewels of Thy grace I wear. 




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fight_the_good_fight_with_all_thy_might.php

Fight the good fight with all thy might;
Christ is thy Strength, and Christ thy Right;
Lay hold on life, and it shall be
Thy joy and crown eternally.

Run the straight race through God’s good grace,
Lift up thine eyes, and seek His face;
Life with its way before us lies,
Christ is the Path, and Christ the Prize.

Cast care aside, upon thy Guide,
Lean, and His mercy will provide;
Lean, and the trusting soul shall prove
Christ is its Life, and Christ its Love.

Faint not nor fear, His arms are near,
He changeth not, and thou art dear.
Only believe, and thou shalt see
That Christ is all in all to thee.




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fill_all_my_vision.php

1. Fill all my vision, Saviour, I pray,
Let me see only Jesus today;
Though thro' the valley Thou leadest me,
Thy fadeless glory encompasseth me. 

Refrain:
Fill all my vision, Saviour divine,
Till with Thy glory my spirit shall shine.
Fill all my vision, that all may see
Thy holy Image reflected in me. 

2. Fill all my vision, every desire
Keep for Thy glory; my soul inspire
With Thy perfection, Thy holy love flooding
My pathway with light from above.
Refrain: 

3. Fill all my vision, let naught of sin
Shadow the brightness shining within.
Let me see only Thy blessed face,
Feasting my soul on Thy infinite grace.
Refrain: 





https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fill_me_now.php



Hover o’er me, Holy Spirit,
Bathe my trembling heart and brow;
Fill me with Thy hallowed presence,
Come, O come and fill me now.
Refrain

Fill me now, fill me now,
Jesus, come and fill me now;
Fill me with Thy hallowed presence,
Come, O come, and fill me now.

Thou canst fill me, gracious Spirit,
Though I cannot tell Thee how;
But I need Thee, greatly need Thee,
Come, O come and fill me now.

Refrain

I am weakness, full of weakness,
At Thy sacred feet I bow;
Blest, divine, eternal Spirit,
Fill with power and fill me now.

Refrain

Cleanse and comfort, bless and save me,
Bathe, O bathe my heart and brow;
Thou art comforting and saving,
Thou art sweetly filling now.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fill_me_up.php



Words and music: Gary Miller © 2000 Anthony K. Music (ASCAP)

Lyrics:

Will you...

Chorus:
Fill me up
Bread of Heaven, fill me
Enlighten me, Bright and Morning Star
Build me up, Master Builder, build me
Empower me, Mighty Great I Am

Fill me up (x4)

They throw me out on the raging sea
Swallow me up where no soul should be
Roll me 'round in the depths of hell
Sin and guilt like a prison cell
And when I've reached it, can take no more
You pull me out safely to the shore
And when I've lost all my will to stand
You lift me up with Your mighty hand
And you...

Repeat Chorus

Fill me up (x4) (oh Lord, fill me)

They throw me down to the lions' den
Surround me 'round wicked evil men
They watch expecting my heart to faint
Listen will I deny my faith?
And when I've reached it, you give me more
You pull my out from the lions' roar
And when I've lost all my will to stand
You lift me up with Your mighty hand
And you...

Repeat Chorus

And heal me up (fill me up), Great Physician, heal me
Inhabit me, Gentle Comforter (Mighty Gentle Comforter)
Use me up (use me up), Holy master, use me
Empower me, Mighty Great I Am (Mighty Great I Am)

Fill Me up (x8 with stepouts)


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fill_me_with_thy_spirit.php

Fill me with Thy Spirit, Lord,
Fully save my longing soul;
Through the precious, cleansing blood
Purify and make me whole. 

Refrain:
Come, O Spirit, seal me Thine,
Come, Thy fullness now bestow;
Let Thy glory in me shine,
Make me whiter than the snow. 

Fill me with Thy holy light,
I would have a single eye;
Make me perfect in Thy sight,
’Tis Thy will to sanctify. 

Fill me with Thy perfect love,
Naught of self would I retain;
Losing all Thy love to prove,
Lord, I count a happy gain. 

Fill me with Thy mighty pow’r,
Father, Son, and Spirit, come;
In my soul the unction pour,
Make me ever all Thine own. 

Fill me with Thy presence now,
Lord, Thyself in me reveal;
At Thy feet I humbly bow
To receive the holy seal.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fill_my_house.php

Fill my house unto the fullest
Eat my bread and drink my wine
The love I bear, is held from no one
All I have and all I do I give to you
Take my time, unto the fullest
Find in me the trust you seek
Take my hands to you outreaching
All I have , and all I do , I give to you
Christ our lord with love enormous
From the cross this lesson taught
Love all men, as I have love you
All I have and all I do I give to you
Join with me, as one in Christ love
May our hearts all beat as one
May we give ourselves completely
All I have and all I do I give to you?


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fill_thou_my_life.php

Fill Thou my life, O Lord my God,
In every part with praise,
That my whole being may proclaim
Thy being and Thy ways.
Not for the lip of praise alone,
Nor e’en the praising heart
I ask, but for a life made up
Of praise in every part!

Praise in the common words I speak,
Life’s common looks and tones,
In fellowship in hearth and board
With my belovèd ones;
Not in the temple crowd alone
Where holy voices chime,
But in the silent paths of earth,
The quiet rooms of time.

Fill every part of me with praise;
Let all my being speak
Of Thee and of Thy love, O Lord,
Poor though I be, and weak.
So shalt Thou, Lord, from me, e’en me,
Receive the glory due;
And so shall I begin on earth
The song forever new.

So shall each fear, each fret, each care
Be turned into a song,
And every winding of the way
The echo shall prolong;
So shall no part of day or night
From sacredness be free;
But all my life, in every step
Be fellowship with Thee.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fill_your_hearts_with_joy.php

Fill your hearts with joy and gladness,
sing and praise your God and mine!
Great the Lord in love and wisdom,
might and majesty divine!
He who framed the starry heavens
knows and names them as they shine.

Praise the Lord, his people, praise him!
wounded souls his comfort know;
those who fear him find his mercies,
peace for pain and joy for woe;
humble hearts are high exalted,
human pride and power laid low.

Praise the Lord for times and seasons,
cloud and sunshine, wind and rain;
spring to melt the snows of winter
till the waters flow again;
grass upon the mountain pastures,
golden valleys thick with grain.

Fill your hearts with joy and gladness,
peace and plenty crown your days;
love his laws, declare his judgments,
walk in all his words and ways;
he the Lord and we his children--
praise the Lord, all people, praise!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/filled_with_the_spirits_power.php

Filled with the Spirit's power with one accord
the infant church confessed its risen Lord.
O Holy Spirit, in the church today
no less your power of fellowship display.

Now with the mind of Christ set us on fire,
that unity may be our great desire.
Give joy and peace; give faith to hear your call,
and readiness in each to work for all.

Widen our love, good Spirit, to embrace
in your strong care people of every race.
Like wind and fire with life among us move,
till we are known as Christ's, and Christians prove.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/find_rest.php

Find rest, oh my soul, in God alone
My hope it comes from him
He above all is loving and strong
A warrior as well as a friend
A rock for my feet, a roof for my head
A bulwark in life's desperate hours
My salvation and my honor depend on God
Then why is my soul so downcast and anxious

I trust you at all times, pour out my heart
Bearing my soul here before you
Cause you aren't like the ones I've trusted before
When I open up
You're there all the more

Low born men are but a breath
The high born are but lie
If placed on a scale before my God
They'd amount to a breath or a sigh
We worry 'bout our position in life
So others will think we've arrived
But you love the peasant as much as the prince
Despised of men as much as the honored

© 1995 Mercy/Vineyard Publishing
CCLI# 1596342


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/find_us_faithful.php

Oh may all who come behind us find us faithful.
May the fire of our devotion light their way.
May the footprints that we leave
Lead them to believe
And the lives we live inspire them to obey.
Oh may all who come behind us find us faithful.

Oh may all who come behind us find us faithful.
May the fire of our devotion light their way.
May the footprints that we leave
Lead them to believe
And the lives we live inspire them to obey.
Oh may all who come behind us find us faithful.

Oh may all who come behind us find us faithful.
May the fire of our devotion light their way.
May the footprints that we leave
Lead them to believe
And the lives we live inspire them to obey.
Oh may all who come behind us find us faithful.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/finished_the_strife_of_battle_now.php

Finished the strife of battle now,
gloriously crowned the victor's brow:
sing with gladness, hence with sadness:
Alleluia, alleluia!

After the death that him befell,
Jesus Christ has harrowed hell:
songs of praising we are raising:
Alleluia, alleluia!

On the third morning he arose,
shining with victory o'er his foes;
earth is singing, heaven is ringing:
Alleluia, alleluia!

Lord, by your wounds on you we call:
now that from death you've freed us all:
may our living be thanksgiving:
Alleluia, alleluia!



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fire_in_the_soul.php

Is the Spirit glowing in thy heart?
Oh, my brother, can you say
That you feel the burning love of God
In thy bosom day by day? 

Refrain:
Yes, ’tis love, ’tis burning love divine,
Filling all my soul’s desire;
Oh, how sweet its glories ever shine!
Now I feel the glowing fire. 

Has the merit of the blood divine
Swept away thy sinful stain?
And does heaven’s glory in Thee shine,
Ever bright and holy flame? 

Is thy hope unclouded by a fear?
*Hallelujah! do you know [*And this moment]
That the love of God is burning clear
In thy heart as white as snow? 

Do you feel the mighty, living pow’r,
Filling all thy mortal frame?
And does all thy heart forever pour
Streams of glory to His name? 

If thy all is on the altar laid,
Guard it from each vain desire;
When thy soul the perfect price hath paid,
God will send the holy fire.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/firey_darts.php

In the hour of sore temptation I may be,
Yet, amid the trials, Jesus’ face I see;
In His word my anchor holdeth to the last,
While the fiery darts are flying thick and fast. 

Refrain:
We shall not be wounded in the hottest fight
If we raise the shield of faith in Jesus’ might;
Through the grace of God we’ll conquer to the last,
While the fiery darts are flying thick and fast. 

In the greatest suff’ring man may undergo,
He shall have the vict’ry if he’ll count it so;
Conqu’ring in the conflict, soon ’twill all be past,
Though the fiery darts are flying think and fast. 

Should I walk in trouble, pressed on every side,
He who knows my weakness will with me abide;
I will ever trust Him in the hottest blast,
While the fiery darts are flying thick and fast. 

In the heated furnace, Father, let me stay,
Precious gold refining, purge the dross away,
Till Thy glorious image is reflected there,
Till the costly jewels of Thy grace I wear. 




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/firm_foundation.php



Words and music: Nancy Gordon and Jamie Harvill © 1994 Integrity's Hosanna! 
Music and Integrity's Praise! Music

Lyrics:

Chorus:
Jesus You’re my firm foundation
(I know) I know I can stand secure
(Oh) Jesus You’re my firm foundation
(I put my hope) I put my hope in Your holy Word
(Oh I put my hope) I put my hope in Your holy Word

I have a living hope (I have a living hope)
I have a future (I have a future)
God has a plan for me (God has a plan for me)
Of this I’m sure 
Of this I’m sure

Repeat Chorus

Your Word is faithful (Your Word is faithful)
Mighty in power (Mighty in power)
God will deliver me (God will deliver me)
Of this I’m sure 
Of this I’m sure

Repeat Chorus (x2)

(I put my hope) I put my hope in Your holy Word
(Oh I put my hope) I put my hope in Your holy Word

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/firm_stands_a_rock.php

There stands a Rock on shores of time
That rears to Heaven its head sublime.
That Rock is cleft, and they are blest
Who find within this cleft a rest.
Refrain

Some build their hopes on the ever drifting sand,
Some on their fame, or their treasure, or their land;
Mine’s on a Rock that forever will stand,
Jesus, the “Rock of Ages."

That Rock’s a cross, its arms outspread,
Celestial glory bathes its head;
To its firm base my all I bring,
And to the Rock of Ages cling.

Refrain

That Rock’s a tower, whose lofty height,
Illumed with Heaven’s unclouded light,
Opes wide its gate beneath the dome
Where saints find rest with Christ at home.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/firmly_i_believe_and_truly.php

Firmly I believe and truly
God is Three, and God is One;
And I next acknowledge duly
Manhood taken by the Son.

And I trust and hope most fully
In that Manhood crucified;
And each thought and deed unruly
Do to death, as He has died.

Simply to His grace and wholly
Light and life and strength belong,
And I love supremely, solely,
Him the holy, Him the strong.

And I hold in veneration,
For the love of Him alone,
Holy Church as His creation,
And her teachings are His own.

And I take with joy whatever
Now besets me, pain or fear,
And with a strong will I sever
All the ties which bind me here.

Adoration aye be given,
With and through the angelic host,
To the God of earth and Heaven,
Father, Son and Holy Ghost.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/first_of_martyrs.php

First of martyrs, thou whose name
Doth thy golden crown proclaim,
Not of flowers that fade away
Weave we this thy crown today.

Bright the stones which bruise thee gleam
Sprinkled with thy life blood’s stream;
Stars around thy sainted head
Never could such radiance shed.

Every wound upon thy brow
Sparkles with unearthly glow;
Like an angel’s is thy face
Beaming with celestial grace.

Oh, how blessèd first to be
Slain for Him Who bled for thee;
First like Him in dying hour
Witness to almighty power.

First to follow where He trod
Through the deep Red Sea of blood;
First, but in thy footsteps press
Saints and martyrs numberless.

Glory to the Father be,
Glory, Virgin Born, to Thee,
Glory to the Holy Ghost,
Praised by men and heavenly host.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/first_step_to_heaven.php

Wake up Oh [G] sinner, you're [D] facing the darkness [G] death
Each [C] moment may be the moment you take your last [G] breath

And the [C] weight of your fears are the shackles that keep you [G] enslaved
But the blood of the Lamb is the [D] one way to bypass the [G] grave.

The first step to [D] heaven, is knowing you?re [G] lost
The highway to [D] Glory, is the way of the [G] Cross

You can hand Him your [C] burdens the moment your [G] see
The first step to [D] Heaven, is down on your [G] knees.

To you [G] believers who've [D] answered the Good Shepherd's [G] call
Flood the [C] chasm of darkness with the light that can save one and [G] all

Not a [C] soul crosses Jordan on weight of the money or [G] deeds
That Mansion up yonder is [D] reserved for those who [G] believe.

The first step to [D] heaven, is knowing you?re [G] lost
The highway to [D] Glory, is the way of the [G] Cross

You can hand Him your [C] burdens the moment your [G] see
The first step to [D] Heaven, is down on your [G] knees.

You can hand Him your [C] burdens the moment your [G] see
The first step to [D] Heaven, is down on your [G] knees.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fish_in_wave_bird_on_wing.php

The fish in wave, the bird on wing,
God bade the waters bear;
Each for our mortal body’s food
His gracious hands prepare.

But other food, of richer cost,
The immortal spirit needs;
By faith it lives on every word
That from His mouth proceeds.

Faith springing from the blood of Christ,
Has flowed o’er every land;
And sinners through the vanquished world
Bow down to its command.

Its light the joy of Heav’n reveals
To hearts made pure within;
And bids them seek by worthy deeds
Eternal crowns to win.

By faith the saints of old were strong
The lion’s wrath to tame;
By faith they spurned the tyrant’s threats,
And scorned the raging flame.

Lord, grant that we the path may tread
Whereon its light doth shine;
And gather, as we onward go,
The fruits of love divine.

O praise the Father; praise the Son,
On Whose most precious blood
Rests all our faith; and praise to Him
Who with Them both is God.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fit_for_a_king.php

His pulpit's a corner on Nineteenth and Main
His grip on the Gospel his one claim to fame 
He hurls fire and brimstone at the cars passing by
and he offers salvation for the Savior on high.
His khakis are tattered and he ain't bathed in weeks 
his bout with the bottle shows up on his cheeks.
He looks like a scarecrow a sight to behold 
as he works for the Shepherd bringin' lambs to the fold. 
He points to the Bible he holds in his hands
says, " I'm proof that the Good Lord can save any man."

CHORUS: Son it ain't what you're drivin' or the clothes that you wear, 
material possessions won't matter up there. 
And someday in heaven when the angels all sing 
these rags that I'm wearin' will be fit for a king.

(Second verse progression same as first)

Verse II:

He's fightin' the fever in spite of the chill, 
he pulls up his collar and he speaks God's will.
His body is weakened but his faith is still strong, 
for he's filled with conviction for the mission he's on.
He knows soon in heaven He'll be homeless no more, 
As his work will soon echo from that far distant shore.

Repeat chorus:

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fix_my_eyes.php

Fix my eyes on Jesus
Fix my eyes on the Lamb

Oh, on you

Never, never turn away
Never, never turn away
Never turn my eyes away from you

What we see is just a shadow
None of it will last
Hidden things are things eternal
They will never pass

Someday soon I'll see the glory
Coming from your face
On that day of revelation
I, too, will be changed
©1994 Evanston Vineyard Music
Words and Music by John Willison
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fix_your_eyes_upon_jesus.php

Would you lose your load of sin?
Fix your eyes upon Jesus;
Would you know God's peace within?
Fix your eyes upon Jesus;

Refrain:
Jesus who on the cross did die,
Jesus who lives and reigns on high,
He alone can justify;
Fix your eyes upon Jesus.

Would you calmly walk the wave?
Fix your eyes upon Jesus;
Would you know His pow'r to save?
Fix your eyes upon Jesus;

Would you have your cares grow light?
Fix your eyes upon Jesus;
Would you songs have in the night?
Fix your eyes upon Jesus;

Would you strength in weakness have?
Fix your eyes upon Jesus;
Would you see beyond the grave?
Fix your eyes upon Jesus; 
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/flash_out_the_search_light.php

Flash out the search light, dark is the way,
Some weary wand’rer is going astray,
Many temptations lurk now at his side,
Many the perils that in his path hide.
Refrain

Flash out the search light, brighten the way,
Follow the souls that in darkened paths stray,
Search in the highways, search in the byways,
Tell them that Jesus bids them come home.

Flash out the search light, bright let it shine,
Bearing the message of mercy divine,
Christ the Redeemer Who seeketh for thee,
Offers a pardon so full and so free.

Refrain

Light up the darkness, scatter the night,
There is a brother who longs for the light,
Now he is faltering, do not delay,
Flash out the search light and brighten the way.

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/flee_as_a_bird.php

Flee as a bird to your mountain, thou who art weary of sin;
Go to the clear flowing fountain where you may wash and be clean.
Haste, then, th’Avenger is near thee; call, and the Savior will hear thee;
He on His bosom will bear thee; O thou who art weary of sin,
O thou who art weary of sin.

He will protect thee forever, wipe every falling tear;
He will forsake thee, O never, sheltered so tenderly there.
Haste, then, the hours are flying, spend not the moments in sighing,
Cease from your sorrow and crying: The Savior will wipe every tear,
The Savior will wipe every tear.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fling_out_the_banner.php

Fling out the banner! let it float

Skyward and seaward, high and wide;
The sun that lights its shining folds,
The cross, on which the Savior died.

Fling out the banner! heathen lands
Shall see from far the glorious sight,
And nations crowding to be born
Baptize their spirits in its light.

Fling out the banner! angels bend
In anxious silence o’er the sight,
And vainly seek to comprehend
The wonder of the love divine.

Fling out the banner! sin sick souls
That sink and perish in the strife,
Shall touch in faith its radiant hem,
And spring immortal into life.

Fling out the banner! let it float
Skyward and seaward, high and wide,
Our glory, only in the cross;
Our only hope, the Crucified!

Fling out the banner! wide and high,
Seaward and skyward, let it shine;
Nor skill, nor might, nor merit ours;
We conquer only in that sign.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fling_to_the_heedless_winds.php

Flung to the heedless winds,
Or on the waters cast,
The martyrs’ ashes, watched,
Shall gathered be at last.

And from that scattered dust,
Around us and abroad,
Shall spring a plenteous seed,
Of witnesses for God.

The Father hath received,
Their latest living breath,
And vain is Satan’s boast,
Of victory in their death.

Still, still, though dead, they speak,
And, trumpet tongued, proclaim,
To many a wakening land,
The one availing Name.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fling_wide_the_door.php

Fling wide the door, unbar the gate;
The King of glory comes in state;
The Lord of lords and King of kings,
The Savior of the world who brings
His great salvation to the earth.
So raise a shout of holy mirth
And praise our God and Lord,
Creator, Spirit Word.

He is the rock of our belief,
The heart of mercy’s gentle self.
His kingly crown is holiness;
His scepter is his loveliness;
He brings our sorrows to an end.
Now gladly praise our king and friend,
And worship him with song,
For saving us from wrong.

O, happy towns and blessed lands
That live by their true king’s commands,
And blessed be the hearts he rules,
The humble places where he dwells.
He is the rightful Son of bliss
Who fills our lives and makes us his,
Creator of the world,
Our only strength for good.

Come, Lord, our Savior, Jesus Christ;
Our hearts are open wide in trust.
Oh, show us now your lovely grace,
Upon our sorrows shine your face,
And let your Holy Spirit guide
Our journey in your grace so wide.
We praise your holy name,
From age to age the same.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/floating_zoo.php

Words and music: Danice Sweet

Lyrics:

A man named Noah
Started building a big boat
He didn’t know whether
That gopher bark would float
But when the Lord says jump
You do what you must do
So Noah made the very first
Floating zoo (floating zoo)

Chorus:
And when the waves started rockin’
The ostriches squawkin’
There was no way to hide in the sand (hide in the sand)
And the elephants wondered
With all that thunder
Would this ship ever hit land
But forty days later
All the alligators
And the other creatures two by two (two by, two by two)
Well they opened the door
And they thanked the Lord
For the very first floating zoo

Well the neighbors laughed
At the cruise ship in the yard
And the smell those creatures left
It made living hard
When it started to pour
Well they all stood there in shock
But God shut the door
And that sea cruise started to rock (started to rock)

Repeat Chorus

So when the rainbow shines
Just remember the time
And thank the Lord you knew (knew, knew)
Ol’ Noah was floatin’ (spoken)
‘Bout the great big ark
That played a part
In the very first floating zoo (floating zoo)




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/flow_through_me.php

Chorus
Flow through me, Holy Spirit, flow through me.
A useful vessel let me be.
Let me touch someone in need
In Your precious Holy name
Flow through me, Holy Spirit, flow through me. 

As You walked down the shore of Galilee
Touching blinded eyes to make them see.
As You made the lame to walk
And You caused the dumb to talk
Flow through me, Holy Spirit, flow through me. 



Chorus
Flow through me, Holy Spirit, flow through me.
A useful vessel let me be.
Let me touch someone in need
In Your precious Holy name
Flow through me, Holy Spirit, flow through me. 

As You moved in the upper room that day,
As Your spirit fell in such a mighty way.
May we never be the same
As we call upon Your name,
Flow through me, Holy Spirit, flow through me. 



Chorus
Flow through me, Holy Spirit, flow through me.
A useful vessel let me be
Let me touch someone in need
In Your precious Holy name
Flow through me, Holy Spirit, flow through me.
As the multitude was fed,
Feed me, Lord, upon Your bread
Flow through me, Holy Spirit, flow through me. 




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/flower_carol.php

Spring has now unwrapped the flowers, day is fast reviving,
Life in all her growing powers towards the light is striving:
Gone the iron touch of cold, winter time and frost time,
Seedlings, working through the mould, now make up for lost time.

Herb and plant that, winter long, slumbered at their leisure,
Now bestirring, green and strong, find in growth their pleasure;
All the world with beauty fills, gold the green enhancing,
Flowers make glee among the hills, set the meadows dancing.

Through each wonder of fair days God Himself expresses;
Beauty follows all His ways, as the world He blesses:
So, as He renews the earth, Artist without rival,
In His grace of glad new birth we must seek revival.

Earth puts on her dress of glee; flowers and grasses hide her;
We go forth in charity—brothers all beside her;
For, as man this glory sees in th’awakening season,
Reason learns the heart’s decrees, hearts are led by reason.

Praise the Maker, all ye saints; He with glory girt you,
He Who skies and meadows paints fashioned all your virtue;
Praise Him, seers, heroes, kings, heralds of perfection;
Brothers, praise Him, for He brings all to resurrection!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/flowers_for_the_masters_bouquet.php

[Bb] Death is an angel sent [E] down from a-[Bb] bove ...
Sent for the buds and the [C#] flowers we [F#] love ...
[Bb] Truly, 'tis so for in [E] heaven's own [Bb] way ...
Each soul is a flower in the [F#] Master's Bou-[Bb] quet.

CHORUS
[E] Gathering flowers for the [Bb] Master's Bouquet ...
Beautiful flowers that will [C#] never de-[F#] cay ...
[Bb] Gathered by angels and [E] carried a-[Bb] way ...
Forever to bloom in the [F#] Master's Bou-[Bb] quet.

Loved ones are passing each day and each hour
Passing away as the life of a flower
But ev'ry bud and each blossom some day
Will bloom as a flower in the Master's Bouquet.

CHORUS

Let us be faithful till life's work is done
Blooming with love till the reaper shall come
Then we'll be gathered together for, (*Ay)
Transplanted to bloom in the Master's Bouquet.

CHORUS

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/flung_to_the_heedless_winds.php

Flung to the heedless winds
Or on the waters cast,
The martyrs' ashes, watched,
Shall gathered be at last.
And from that scattered dust,
Around us and abroad,
Shall spring a plenteous seed
Of witnesses for God. 

The Father hath received
Their latest living breath,
And vain is Satan's boast
Of victory in their death.
Still, still, though dead, they speak,
And, trumpet-tongued, proclaim
To many a wakening land
The one availing Name. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/follow.php

Chorus:
Follow me, follow me
My disciple ever be
Follow me, follow me
My disciple you will ever be
Jesus was walkin down by the sea
When He saw these fishers, and said "Come follow me"
Well there was Peter, and there was James and John
And there was Andrew, they were all fishermen's sons
Then right there they dropped their nets
Never again to look back

Repeat Chorus

Jesus was walkin through the marketplace
When He looked up and saw Matthew's face
He was the tax man, and he was hated by all
But then he stood up, and he heeded the call
He left that table standing there
Never again to look back

Repeat Chorus

(Follow me, follow me)
(Follow me, follow me) Jesus is livin, and He's callin for you
(Follow me, follow me) So listen to Him, be born and made anew
(Follow me, follow me) He is comin, again in clouds one day
(Follow me, follow me) So follow Jesus, and His will obey
(Follow me) Begin new life, be born again
(Follow me, follow me) Don't look back, don't look back

Repeat Chorus


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/follow_me_a_call_so_tender.php

“Follow Me!" A call so tender
Falls upon my list’ning ear;
’Tis the voice of Christ, my Savior,
’Tis the Shepherd’s call I hear.
Refrain

O that call! Loving call!
’Tis the sweetest voice of all.
How it draws me nearer to Him
When I hear my Shepherd’s call!

Into pastures green He leadeth,
His own sheep He calls by name;
When their feet are sore and weary,
In His arms He carries them.

Refrain

Little flock, fear not! He shields thee
From the dangers of the land.
Hear His promise: None shall ever
Pluck thee from His mighty hand.

Refrain

In His steps, then, I would follow,
Seek in Him my all in all;
I am safe, whate’er befalls me,
When I heed His tender call.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/follow_me_the_master_said.php

“Follow Me," the Master said;
We will follow Jesus:
By His Word and Spirit led,
We will follow Jesus.
Still for us He lives to plead,
At the throne doth intercede,
Offers help in time of need:
We will follow Jesus.

Should the world and sin oppose,
We will follow Jesus:
He is greater than our foes,
We will follow Jesus.
On His promise we depend;
He will succor and defend,
Help and keep us to the end:
We will follow Jesus.

Tho’ the way may dark appear,
We will follow Jesus:
He will make our pathway clear,
We will follow Jesus.
In our daily round of care,
As we plead with God in prayer,
With the cross which we must bear,
We will follow Jesus.

Ever keep the end in view;
We will follow Jesus:
All His promises are true:
We will follow Jesus.
When this earthly course is run,
And the Master says, “Well done!"
Life eternal we’ll have won!
We will follow Jesus.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/follow_on.php

Down in the valley with my Savior I would go,
Where the flowers are blooming and the sweet waters flow;
Everywhere He leads me I would follow, follow on,
Walking in His footsteps till the crown be won.
Refrain

Follow! follow! I would follow Jesus!
Anywhere, everywhere, I would follow on!
Follow! follow! I would follow Jesus!
Everywhere He leads me I would follow on!

Down in the valley with my Savior I would go,
Where the storms are sweeping and the dark waters flow;
With His hand to lead me I will never, never fear,
Danger cannot fright me if my Lord is near.

Refrain

Down in the valley, or upon the mountain steep,
Close beside my Savior would my soul ever keep;
He will lead me safely in the path that He has trod,
Up to where they gather on the hills of God.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/follow_the_gleam.php

To the knights in the days of old,
Keeping watch on the mountain height,
Came a vision of Holy Grail
And a voice through the waiting night:
Follow, follow, follow the gleam;
Banners unfurled o’er all the world;
Follow, follow, follow the gleam
Of the chalice that is the Grail.

And we who would serve the King,
And loyally Him obey,
In the consecrate silence know
That the challenge still holds today,
Follow, follow, follow the gleam
Standards of worth o’er all the earth;
Follow, follow, follow the gleam
Of the Light that shall bring the dawn.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/following_him.php

Following Jesus day by day,
Following Him—His will obey,
Following Him, I cannot stray,
I’ll follow Him all the way. 

Refrain:
Following Him, following Him,
Following Him by night and by day;
Following Him, following Him,
I’ll follow Him all the way. 

Following Him through all the night,
Following Him into the light,
Following Him, ’tis always right,
I’ll follow Him all the way. 

Following Him through joy or woe,
Following Him, in grace to grow,
Following Him, His love to know,
I’ll follow Him all the way. 



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/following_jesus.php

Following Jesus, following Jesus,
Gently He leads me in the heavenly way;
Watching and praying, trusting, obeying,
He will restrain me from going astray. 

Refrain:
Following Jesus, following Jesus,
Following Jesus by day and by night;
Watching and praying, trusting, obeying,
He is my helper in doing the right. 

Following Jesus, following Jesus,
He who has suffered to redeem me from sin;
Oh, what a blessing, while I知 confessing,
He in His fullness is reigning within. 

Following Jesus, following Jesus,
I am delighted with His wonderful love;
While I知 confiding, in Him I知 hiding,
Soon I shall meet Him in heaven above. 

Following Jesus, following Jesus,
This is my duty for His goodness to me;
Joyful in glory, telling the story,
How in His favor I知 happy and free. 



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fools_in_their_heart_believe_and_say.php

Fools in their heart believe and say,
“That all religion’s vain;
There is no God that reigns on high,
Or minds th’affairs of men."

From thoughts so dreadful and profane,
Corrupt discourse proceeds;
And in their impious hands are found
Abominable deeds.

The Lord from His celestial throne
Looked down on things below,
To find the man that sought His grace,
Or did His justice know.

By nature all are gone astray,
Their practice all the same;
There’s none that fears his Maker’s hand;
There’s none that loves His Name.

Their tongues are used to speak deceit,
Their slanders never cease;
How swift to mischief are their feet,
Nor know the paths of peace!

Such seeds of sin—that bitter root—
In every heart are found;
Nor can they bear diviner fruit
Till grace refine the ground.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fools_in_their_heart_have_said.php

Fools in their heart have said,
There is no God of might;
Corrupt are they and base their deeds,
In evil they delight.

God looked from Heav’n above
On all the human race
To see if any understood,
If any sought His face.

They all are gone aside,
Corruption doth abound;
There is not one that doeth good,
Not even one is found.

These men of evil deeds
Will they no knowledge gain,
Who feed upon my people’s woes
And prayer to God disdain?

The day is drawing nigh
When they shall fear and quail
For God shall scatter and destroy
Those who His saints assail.

Yea, God will put to shame
And make them flee away,
For He will cast them off in wrath
And fill them with dismay.

O would that Zion’s help
Were out of Zion come!
O would that God might early bring
His captive people home!

When God from distant lands
His exiled ones shall bring,
His people shall exultant be,
And gladly they shall sing.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/footprints.php

The dream I had last night
Was an example of love
I dreamt I walked on the seashore
Side by side with my Lord Jesus Christ
And as we walked on the shore
The Lord began to show me
Scenes I’d long forgotten
Of all I’ve been through in this life
I saw them again on a screen

Scenes of the happy moments
When there was plenty
On my table at supper
Wherever I walked I could see
Two sets of footprints on the shore
And then the Lord told me:
“In the beautiful moments of life
To guide you in all your steps
I was always there by your side."

And then my lack of faith
Had to ruin everything
When scenes of the saddest moments
In all of my life were shown to me
Then to the Lord I complained
I saw just one set of footprints
“When I needed You most
When I suffered and cried
You abandoned me!"

And then in that holy moment
The Lord embraced me
And told me like this:
“I wore a crown of thorns
I died on a cross and you still doubt Me!

Son these footprints are Mine
Listen to what I will say
In your hours of pain
I had you in My arms all the way!" 



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/foot_prints_of_jesus.php

Sweetly, Lord, have we heard Thee calling,
Come, follow Me!
And we see where Thy footprints falling
Lead us to Thee.
Refrain

Footprints of Jesus,
That make the pathway glow;
We will follow the steps of Jesus
Where’er they go.

Though they lead o’er the cold, dark mountains,
Seeking His sheep;
Or along by Siloam’s fountains,
Helping the weak.

Refrain

If they lead through the temple holy,
Preaching the Word;
Or in homes of the poor and lowly,
Serving the Lord.

Refrain

Though, dear Lord, in Thy pathway keeping,
We follow Thee;
Through the gloom of that place of weeping,
Gethsemane!

Refrain

If Thy way and its sorrows bearing,
We go again,
Up the slope of the hillside, bearing
Our cross of pain.

Refrain

By and by, through the shining portals,
Turning our feet,
We shall walk, with the glad immortals,
Heav’n’s golden street.

Refrain

Then at last when on high He sees us,
Our journey done,
We will rest where the steps of Jesus
End at His throne.

Refrain




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/footsteps_of_jesus.php

Sweetly, Lord, have we heard Thee calling,
Come, follow Me!
And we see where Thy footprints falling
Lead us to Thee. 


Refrain
Footprints of Jesus,
That make the pathway glow;
We will follow the steps of Jesus
Where'er they go. 

Though they lead o'er the cold, dark mountains,
Seeking His sheep;
Or along by Siloam's fountains,
Helping the weak. 



Refrain
Footprints of Jesus,
That make the pathway glow;
We will follow the steps of Jesus
Where'er they go. 

If they lead through the temple holy,
Preaching the Word;
Or in homes of the poor and lowly,
Serving the Lord. 



Refrain
Footprints of Jesus,
That make the pathway glow;
We will follow the steps of Jesus
Where'er they go. 

Though, dear Lord, in Thy pathway keeping,
We follow Thee;
Through the gloom of that place of weeping,
Gethsemane! 



Refrain




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_a_worldwide_revival.php

For a worldwide revival,
Blessèd Master, we pray.
Let the pow’r of the Highest
Be upon us today;
For this world, dearly purchased
By the blood of God’s Son,
Back from Satan’s dominion
And from sin must be won.
Refrain

Send the power, O Lord,
Send the power, O Lord.
Send the Holy Ghost power;
Let it now be outpoured.
Send it surging and sweeping
Like the waves of the sea.
Send a worldwide revival,
And begin it in me.

Send the “showers of blessing,"
As declared in Thy Word,
Let the “Spirit of promise"
On all flesh be outpoured;
Send the “latter rain" on us,
Till the land overflows,
Till the desert, rejoicing,
Blossoms forth as the rose.

Refrain

There’s a “sound of a going
In the mulberry trees,"
News of nations awaking
Borne upon ev’ry breeze;
For the prayers of His children,
God in mercy doth own.
The revival’s beginning,
And the power’s coming down.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_all_the_blessings_of_the_year.php

For all the blessings of the year,
For all the friends we hold so dear,
For peace on earth, both far and near,
We thank Thee, Lord.

For life and health, those common things,
Which every day and hour brings,
For home, where our affection clings,
We thank Thee, Lord.

For love of Thine, which never tires,
Which all our better thought inspires,
And warms our lives with heavenly fires,
We thank Thee, Lord.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_all_the_lord_has_done_for_me.php

For all the Lord has done for me,
I never will cease to love Him;
And for His grace so rich and free,
I never will cease to love Him.
Refrain

I never will cease to love Him,
My Savior, my Savior;
I never will cease to love Him,
He’s done so much for me.

He gives me strength for every day,
I never will cease to love Him;
He leads and guides me all the way,
I never will cease to love Him.

Refrain

Though all the world His love neglect,
I never will cease to love Him;
I could not such a Friend reject,
I never will cease to love Him.

Refrain

While on my journey here below,
I never will cease to love Him;
And when to that bright world I go,
I never will cease to love Him.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_all_the_saints.php

For all the saints, who from their labors rest,
Who Thee by faith before the world confessed,
Thy Name, O Jesus, be forever blessed.
Alleluia, Alleluia! 


Thou wast their Rock, their Fortress and their Might;
Thou, Lord, their Captain in the well fought fight;
Thou, in the darkness drear, their one true Light.
Alleluia, Alleluia!

For the Apostles’ glorious company,
Who bearing forth the Cross o’er land and sea,
Shook all the mighty world, we sing to Thee:
Alleluia, Alleluia!

For the Evangelists, by whose blest word,
Like fourfold streams, the garden of the Lord,
Is fair and fruitful, be Thy Name adored.
Alleluia, Alleluia!

For Martyrs, who with rapture kindled eye,
Saw the bright crown descending from the sky,
And seeing, grasped it, Thee we glorify.
Alleluia, Alleluia!

O blest communion, fellowship divine!
We feebly struggle, they in glory shine;
All are one in Thee, for all are Thine.
Alleluia, Alleluia!

O may Thy soldiers, faithful, true and bold,
Fight as the saints who nobly fought of old,
And win with them the victor’s crown of gold.
Alleluia, Alleluia!

And when the strife is fierce, the warfare long,
Steals on the ear the distant triumph song,
And hearts are brave, again, and arms are strong.
Alleluia, Alleluia!

The golden evening brightens in the west;
Soon, soon to faithful warriors comes their rest;
Sweet is the calm of paradise the blessed.
Alleluia, Alleluia!

But lo! there breaks a yet more glorious day;
The saints triumphant rise in bright array;
The King of glory passes on His way.
Alleluia, Alleluia!

From earth’s wide bounds, from ocean’s farthest coast,
Through gates of pearl streams in the countless host,
And singing to Father, Son and Holy Ghost:
Alleluia, Alleluia!


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_all_thy_saints_a_noble_throng.php

For all Thy saints, a noble throng,
Who fell by fire and sword,
Who soon were called, or waited long,
We praise Thy Name, O Lord!

For him who left his father’s side,
Nor lingered by the shore,
When, softer than the weltering tide,
Thy summons glided o’er.

Who stood beside the maiden dead,
Who climbed the mount with Thee,
And saw the glory round Thy head,
One of Thy chosen three.

Who knelt beneath the olive shade,
Who drank Thy cup of pain,
And passed from Herod’s flashing blade
To see Thy face again.

Lord, give us grace, and give us love,
Like him to leave behind
Earth’s cares and joys, and look above
With true and earnest mind.

So shall we learn to drink Thy cup,
So meek and firm be found,
When Thou shalt come to take us up
Where Thine elect are crowned.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_all_thy_saints_o_lord.php

For all thy saints, 0 Lord,
our grateful hymn receive,
who followed thee. obeyed, adored,
and strove in thee to live.

For all thy saints, 0 Lord, 
accept our thankful cry,
who counted thee their great reward,
who strove in thee to die.

Thine earthly members fit 
to join thy saints above,
in one communion ever knit,
one fellowship of love.

Jesus, thy name we bless, 
and humbly pray that we
may follow them in holiness
and live and die in thee.

All might, all praise, be thine,
Father, co-equal Son,
and Spirit, bond of love divine,
while endless ages run.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_all_your_blessings.php

For all your blessings,
Jesus, we praise you,
gracious in mercy,
strong to console.
You to our need bring 
comfort and healing,
love and forgiveness,
making us whole.

Daily around us,
pain and confusion
crumble our feeble
faith into dust.
Yet still we find your
love in the darkness,
changing our anxious
thoughts into trust.

We carry with us
into your presence
prisoners of sickness,
sadness, and fear;
grant them to know your
peace in their suffering
and new life flowing,
for you are near.

Grant us, your servants,
grace to work with you,
that in your loving
task we may share
mind's understanding,
hands skilled for healing,
hearts of compassion,
joined in love's care.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_all_youve_done.php

My Savior, Redeemer
Lifted my from the miry clay
Almighty, Forever
I will never be the same

'Cause you came near
From the everlasting
To the world we live
The Father's only son

And you lived and you died
And you rose again on high
And you opened the way
For the world to live again
Hallelujah, for all you've done

© 2004 Reuben Morgan/Hillsongs Publishing
adm. in the US & Canada by Integrity's Hosanna! Music
CCLI #1596342
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_ever_we_would_gaze_on_thee.php

For ever we would gaze on Thee,
O Lord, upon the Mount;
With Moses and Elias see
That light from Light’s own Fount;

For ever with the chosen three
Would stand upon that height,
And in that blessèd company
Be plunged in pure delight.

For ever would we train the ear
To that celestial Voice;
In Thee, the Son of God, so near
For evermore rejoice.

Here would we pitch our constant tent,
For ever here abide;
And dwell in peace and full content,
Dear Master, at Thy side.

But no! not yet to man ’tis given
To rest upon that height;
’Tis but a passing glimpse of Heav’n;
We must descend and fight.

Beneath the Mount is toil and pain;
O Christ, Thy strength impart;
Till we, transfigured, too, shall reign
For ever where Thou art.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_ever_with_the_lord.php

"For ever with the Lord!"
Amen; so let it be:
Life from the dead is in that word,
'Tis immortality.
Here in the body pent,
Absent from him I roam,
Yet nightly pitch my moving tent
A day's march nearer home.

My Father's house on high,
Home of my soul, how near
At times to faith's foreseeing eye
Thy golden gates appear!
Ah! then my spirit faints
To reach the land I love,
The bright inheritance of saints,
Jerusalem above.

"For ever with the Lord!"
Father, if 'tis thy will,
The promise of that faithful word
Even here to me fulfil.
Be thou at my right hand,
Then can I never fail;
Uphold thou me, and I shall stand,
Fight, and I must prevail.

So when my latest breath
Shall rend the veil in twain,
By death I shall escape from death,
And life eternal gain.
Knowing as I am known,
How shall I love that word,
And oft repeat before the throne,
"For ever with the Lord!"

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_god_so_loved_the_world.php

A story sweet and wondrous,
Like heav’nly music swells;
In chimings clear to all who will hear,
Ring out the Gospel bells.
For God so loved the world
That He gave His only begotten Son,
That whosoever believeth in Him,
Whosoever believeth in Him
Should not perish,
Should not perish,
But have everlasting life.

When, grieving, brokenhearted,
Because of sin and shame,
We find a joy earth cannot destroy,
Believing on His Name.

Refrain

This love beyond all measure
Of earth or sea or sky,
Could only show its full overflow,
When Jesus came to die.

Refrain

Come, brother, come to Jesus;
His Word was meant for you;
His grace receive, His promise believe,
And sing His praise anew.

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_god_so_loved_this_sinful_world.php

For God so loved this sinful world,
His Son He freely gave,
That whosoever would believe
Eternal life should have.
Refrain

’Tis true, O yes, ’tis true,
God’s wonderful promise is true;
For I’ve trusted, and tested, and tried it,
And I know God’s promise is true.

I was a wayward, wand’ring child,
A slave to sin and fear,
Until this blessèd promise fell
Like music on my ear.

Refrain

The “whosoever" of the Lord,
I trusted was for me,
I took Him at His gracious word;
From sin He set me free.

Refrain

Eternal life, begun below,
Now fills my heart and soul.
I’ll sing His praise forevermore
Who has redeemed my soul.

Refrain



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_health_and_strength.php
Christian 
lyrics online will lead you to thousands of lyrics to hymns, choruses, worship 
songs and gospel recordings. Free Christian hymn lyrics include popular hymns, 
both new and old, traditional and modern, as well as rare and hard-to-find 
hymns. We have been online since 2004 and have reached over 1 million people in 
over 150 countries worldwide. In 2007, this site became the largest Christian 
lyrics site on the entire internet. 

© 2011
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_jesus_instead.php

Words and music: Keith Lancaster (1982) © 1992 Anthony K. Music (ASCAP)

Lyrics: 

When I heard of salvation and of reconciliation
I decided I would change my ol' ways (I decided I would change my ol' ways)
Yes, I fully repented adn I made a real commitment
That will last me for the rest of my days (for the rest of my days)
Oh, I don't mind when I'm givin' Him my time
Yes, I'll do it 'til the day that I'm dead
When I live for Him, brother, I'll not take to any other
'Cause I'm livin' for Jesus instead 

Chorus:
For Jesus instead (I've been livin')
For Jesus instead
For Jesus instead (I've been livin')
For Jesus instead
For Jesus instead (I've been livin')
For Jesus instead
For Jesus instead (I've been livin')
For Jesus instead 

Well, the way I've been livin' and the work that I've been givin'
I've been doing it all for the Son (I've been doing it all for the Son)
And when times were a testin' and when Satan started pressin'
I decided that I wouldn't run (no, I didn't frown)
No, I didn't frown when ol' Satan came around
I just stuck by my guns and I said,
"You must be mistaken and you sin I'm not a-takin'
'Cause I'm livin' for Jesus intead" 

Repeat Chorus 

For Jesus instead 

Well if you life's a revival and you're readin' your Bible
And you're trustin' in God as your friend (trustin' in God as your friend)
If you're sharin' the message and to people you're a blessin'
And the Spirit is livin' within (well, you don't care)
Well, you don't care when the people start to share
And to say that you're out of your head
It'll never get to you when ol' Satan tries to fool you
'Cause you're livin' for Jesus instead 

Repeat Chorus 

I've been livin', yes I'm livin'
I've been livin' for Jesus instead 



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_me.php

I know that you're there when I cry
With every heart beat you're there by my side

All that I am I give to you
For I know that you will break through
I give you my heart for I know that you

You're for me
I know that you're for me
Oh you are for me
I know that you're for me

I know that you're there when I call
Your love to surround me your grace to restore

All that I am...

© 2000 Vineyard Songs (UK/Eire)
CCLI# 1596342



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_me_all_is_well.php

No sigh nor a tear since my Jesus is here,
In His presence securely I dwell;
I hear His sweet voice, and it makes me rejoice,
I know that for me all is well. 

Refrain:
’Tis well with my soul since the Lord made me whole,
And His smiles all my sorrows dispel;
On His bosom I rest, in His love I am blest;
I know that for me all is well. 

I sit at His feet, and my joy is complete,
He gives me this message to tell:
Oh, lean on His arm, He will save from all harm,
And fit you in heaven to dwell. 

Oh, yield to Him now, and in lowliness bow,
And drink from this life-giving well;
The taste is so sweet, and the joy so complete,
Its pleasure we never can tell. 

And when by and by He descends from on high,
He will take us to heaven to dwell;
We’ll sing this glad song as we journey along,
I know that for me all is well. 



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_me_to_live_is_jesus.php



1. For me to live Is Jesus. 
To die is gain for me;
Then, whensoe'er He pleases,
I meet death willingly. 

2. For Christ, my Lord and Brother,
I leave this world so dim
And gladly seek that other,
Where I shall be with Him. 

3. My woes are nearly over,
Though long and dark the road;
My sin His merits cover,
And I have peace with God. 

4. Lord, when my powers are failing,
My breath comes heavily,
And words are unavailing.
Oh, hear my sighs to Thee! 

5. When mind and thought, 0 Savior,
Are flickering like a light
That to and fro doth waver
Ere 'tis extinguished quite, 

6. In that last hour, oh, grant me
To slumber soft and still,
No doubts to vex or haunt me,
Safe anchored on Thy will; 

7. And so to Thee still cleaving
Through all death's agony,
To fall asleep believing
And wake in heaven with Thee. 

8.Amen! Thou, Christ, my Savior.
Wilt grant this unto me.
Thy Spirit lead me ever
That I fare happily.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_my_sake_and_the_gospels.php



“For My sake, and the Gospel’s, go
And tell redemption’s story";
His heralds answer, “Be it so,
And Thine, Lord, all the glory!"
They preach His birth, His life, His cross,
The love of His atonement,
For Whom they count the world but loss,
His Easter, His enthronement.

Hark, hark, the trump of jubilee
Proclaims to every nation,
From pole to pole, by land and sea,
Glad tidings of salvation;
As nearer draws the day of doom,
While still the battle rages,
The heav’nly Dayspring through the gloom
Breaks on the night of ages.

Still on and on the anthems spread
Of alleluia voices,
In concert with the holy dead
The warrior church rejoices;
Their snow white robes are washed in blood,
Their golden harps are ringing;
Earth and the paradise of God
One triumph song are singing.

He comes, Whose advent trumpet drowns
The last of time’s evangels,
Emmanuel crowned with many crowns,
The Lord of saints and angels;
O Life, Light, Love, the great I AM,
Triune, Who changest never,
The throne of God and of the Lamb
Is Thine, and Thine forever.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_my_ways_are_not_your_ways.php

Abraham. Here I am Lord
Take now your son
Your only son 
The one you love, Isaac 
Go to the land of Moriah
To offer him there
Burn him as a sacrifice to Me
Burn him as a sacrifice to Me

Father. Here I am son
I have the wood
You have the fire
But where’s the lamb to offer?
The Lord will provide the lamb my son
To burn as a sacrifice for Him
To burn as a sacrifice for Him 

For My ways are not your ways, Abraham
Sacrifice brings blessings more than pain
I swear by Myself
Because you have done this thing

And not withheld your son, your only son
I will greatly bless you
Your descendants shall possess
The gates of their enemies
Every nation will be blessed because of you

O’ My child. Here I am Lord 
Take now your future Your world, your life
The things you love, your treasure
And though you may bleed
Cut them loose and set them free
Burn them as a sacrifice to Me
Burn them as a sacrifice to Me



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_sacrifice_or_service.php

For sacrifice or service,
We stand in readiness
To do Thy bidding, Master,
With joy and faithfulness;
It matters not what Thou shoudst ask,
We’ll serve Thee willingly;
So help us, give us strength and grace
To labor on for Thee. 

Thy call we’ve heard, O Master,
And hast’ning to obey,
We rally ’round Thy standard,
We’re ready for the fray!
Behold! the battle is begun,
The host of sin must flee:
For Thou, O Lord, our Captain, art
Assuring victory! 

We pray Thee, blessed Master,
Endue us with Thy pow’r;
Without Thee we are helpless,
Supply our needs each hour;
Resolved we are to faithful prove,
Devoted, Lord, and true:
In sacrifice or service, we
Thy will indeed will do. 



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_salvation_full_and_free.php

For salvation full and free,
Purchased once on Calvary,
Christ alone shall be my plea—
Jesus! Jesus only.
Refrain

Jesus only, let me see,
Jesus only, none save He,
Then my song shall ever be—
Jesus! Jesus only!

He my Guide from day to day,
As I journey on life’s way;
Close beside Him let me stay—
Jesus! Jesus only.

Refrain

May my model ever be
Christ the Lord, and none save He,
That the world may see in me
Jesus! Jesus only.

Refrain

He shall reign from shore to shore,
His the glory evermore—
Heav’n and earth shall bow before
Jesus! Jesus only.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_the_beauty_of_the_earth.php

For the beauty of the earth
For the glory of the skies,
For the love which from our birth
Over and around us lies. 


Refrain

Lord of all, to Thee we raise,
This our hymn of grateful praise.

For the beauty of each hour,
Of the day and of the night,
Hill and vale, and tree and flower,
Sun and moon, and stars of light.

Refrain

For the joy of ear and eye,
For the heart and mind’s delight,
For the mystic harmony
Linking sense to sound and sight.

Refrain

For the joy of human love,
Brother, sister, parent, child,
Friends on earth and friends above,
For all gentle thoughts and mild.

Refrain

For Thy Church, that evermore
Lifteth holy hands above,
Offering up on every shore
Her pure sacrifice of love.

Refrain

For the martyrs’ crown of light,
For Thy prophets’ eagle eye,
For Thy bold confessors’ might,
For the lips of infancy.

Refrain

For Thy virgins’ robes of snow,
For Thy maiden mother mild,
For Thyself, with hearts aglow,
Jesu, Victim undefiled.

Refrain

For each perfect gift of Thine,
To our race so freely given,
Graces human and divine,
Flowers of earth and buds of Heaven.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_the_bread_which_thou_hast_broken.php

For the bread, which Thou hast broken;
For the wine, which Thou hast poured;
For the words, which Thou hast spoken—
Now we give Thee thanks, O Lord.

By this pledge that Thou dost love us,
By Thy gift of peace restored,
By Thy call to Heaven above us,
Hallow all our lives, O Lord.

With our sainted ones in glory,
Seated at our Father’s board,
May the Church that waiteth for Thee
Keep love’s tie unbroken, Lord.

In Thy service, Lord, defend us,
In our hearts keep watch and ward;
In the world where Thou dost send us
Let Thy kingdom come, O Lord.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_the_cross.php

I will love you for the Cross
And I will love you for the cost
Man of sufferings, bringer of my peace.
You came into a world of shame
And paid the price we could not pay
Death that brought me life,
Blood that brought me home.
Death that brought me life, 
Blood that brought me home.

And I love you for the cross,
I'm overwhelmed by the mystery,
I love you for the cross,
That Jesus you would do this for me.
When you were broken, you were beaten,
You were punished, I go free,
When you were wounded and rejected,
In Your mercy, I am healed.

Jesus Christ the sinner's Friend
Does this kindness know no bounds?
With your precious blood you have purchased me.
O, the mystery of the cross
You were punished, you were crushed
But that punishment has become my peace
Yes, that punishment has become my peace.

© 1998 Kingsway's Thankyou Music
CCLI #1596342

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/dear_ones_partes_from_us.php

For the dear ones parted from us
We would raise our hymns of prayer;
By the tender love which watcheth
Round Thy children everywhere,
Holy Father, Holy Father,
Keep them ever in Thy care.

Through each trial and temptation,
Dangers faced by night and day,
By the infinite compassion
Pleading for souls that stray,
Loving Savior, Loving Savior,
Keep them in the narrow way.

In their hours of doubt and sorrow,
When their faith is sorely tried,
By the grace divine which strengthens,
Souls for whom the Savior died,
Gracious Spirit, Gracious Spirit,
Be Thou evermore their Guide.

In their joys, by friends surrounded,
In their strife, by foes oppressed,
May Thy blessing still be with them,
May Thy presence give them rest,
God Almighty, God Almighty,
Father, Son, and Spirit blest.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_the_deep_love_that_kept_us.php

For the deep love that kept us through the night,
And gave our senses to sleep’s gentle sway;
For this new wonder of morning’s dawning light,
Flushing the east with prophecies of day,
We thank Thee, O our God.

For the fresh life that through our being flows,
With its full tide to enrich and to bless;
For calm, sweet thoughts, upspringing from repose,
To bear to Thee our song of thankfulness,
We praise Thee, O our God.

Day utters speech to day, and night to night
Tells of Thy glory and power. So would we
Thy children, duly, with morning’s golden light,
Or still at eve, upon the bended knee,
Adore Thee, O our God.

Thou knowest our needs, Thy fullness will supply;
Our blindness, Thy hand will still lead us on;
Till we shall see the Dayspring from on high,
Our prayer, one only, “Let Thy will be done,"
We breathe to Thee, O God.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_the_fruit_of_all_creation.php

For the fruit of all creation,
thanks be to God.
gifts bestowed on every nation,
thanks be to God.
For the plowing, sowing, reaping,
silent growth while we are sleeping,
future needs in earth's safekeeping,
thanks be to God.

In the just reward of labor,
God's will is done.
In the help we give our neighbor,
God's will is done.
In our worldwide task of caring
for the hungry and despairing,
in the harvests we are sharing,
God's will is done.

For the harvests of the Spirit,
thanks be to God.
For the good we all inherit,
thanks be to God.
For the wonders that astound us,
for the truths that still confound us,
most of all that love has found us,
thanks be to God.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_the_healing_of_nations.php

For the healing of the nations,
Lord, we pray with one accord,
for a just and equal sharing
of the things that earth affords.
To a life of love in action
help us rise and pledge our word.

Lead us forward into freedom,
from despair your world release,
that, redeemed from war and hatred,
all may come and go in peace.
Show us how through care and goodness
fear will die and hope increase.

All that kills abundant living,
let it from the earth be banned:
pride of status, race or schooling,
dogmas that obscure your plan.
In our common quest for justice
may we hallow brief life's span.

You, Creator God, have written
your great name on humankind;
for our growing in your likeness
bring the life of Christ to mind;
that by our response and service
earth its destiny may find.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_the_lord_is_marching_on.php

For the Lord is marching on
And His army is ever strong
And His glory shall be seen upon our land
Raise the anthem, sing the victor's song
Praise the Lord for the battle's won
No weapon formed against us shall stand

Chorus
For the Captain of the host is Jesus
We're following in His footsteps
No foe can stand against us in the fray (2x)

We are marching in Messiah's band
The keys of vict'ry in His mighty hand
Let us march on to take our promised land
For the Lord is marching on
And His army is ever strong
And His glory shall be seen upon our land.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_the_might_of_thine_arm.php

For the might of thine arm we bless thee, our God, our fathers' God;
thou hast kept thy pilgrim people by the strength of thy staff and rod;
thou hast called us to the journey which faithless feet ne'er trod;
for the might of thine arm we bless thee, our God, our fathers' God.

For the love of Christ constraining, that bound their hearts as one; 
for the faith in truth and freedom in which their work was done;
for the peace of God's evangel wherewith their feet were shod;
for the might of thine arm we bless thee, our God, our fathers' God.

We are watchers of a beacon whose light must never die;
we are guardians of an altar that shows thee ever nigh;
we are children of thy freemen who sleep beneath the sod;
for the might of thine arm we bless thee, our God, our fathers' God.

May the shadow of thy presence around our camp be spread; 
baptize us with the courage thou gavest to our dead;
0 keep us in the pathway their saintly feet have trod;
for the might of thine arm we bless thee, our God, our fathers' God.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_the_ones.php

(Em) This (C) song (G) is for the (D) ones (Em) who (C) believe in God
(G) above (D)
(Em) This (C) song (G) is for the (D) ones (Em) who (C) ponder on the
(G) love (D) of (Em) God (C-G-D)

To (Em) give; (C) what does it (G) mean to (D) give?
(Em) It's (C) surely not to (G) take (D).
A(Em)bandon(C)ing one's (G) own de(D)sires-
(Em) For (C) someone else's (G) sake (D).

(Em) What does it (C) mean (G) to really (D) pray?
(Em) To (C) put life in God's (G) hands (D).
To (Em) trust that (C) He (G) is in con(D)trol-
(Em) For (C) I am just a (G) man (D).

To (Em) worry; (C) (G) Why to (D) worry?
(Em) Why (C) waste such precious (G) time (D)?
Im(Em)provement (C) for (G) a better (D) life-
(Em) Is (C) lost to stress of (G) mind (D).

(Em) What does it (C) mean (G) to really (D) love?
(Em) To (C) sacrifice one's (G) needs (D).
To (Em) give one's (C) life (G) for someone (D) else-
(Em) Re(C)gardless of their (G) deeds (D).

(Em) This (C) song (G) is for the (D) ones (Em) who (C) believe in God
(G) above


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_the_whole_wide_world.php

“Of one blood God hath made all the nations of the earth,"
Over all His banner wide unfurled;
And He bids us to go and His saving grace proclaim
To the whole wide world.
Refrain

For the whole wide world,
For the whole wide world;
Jesus dying bro’t a full salvation
For the whole wide world.

To the lanes and the highways and byways we must go,
Till the pow’rs of sin are backward hurled;
And the streams of His grace shall for cleansing onward flow
To the whole wide world.

Refrain

We must carry the Gospel to earth’s remotest bound,
Men are dying for the precious Word;
Until ev’ry nation has heard the joyful sound
In the whole wide world.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_thee_o_dear_dear_country.php

For thee, O dear, dear country,
Mine eyes their vigils keep;
For very love, beholding
Thy happy name, they weep.
The mention of thy glory
Is unction to the breast
And medicine in sickness
And love and life and rest.

O one, O only mansion,
O paradise of joy,
Where tears are ever banished
And smiles have no alloy!
The Lamb is all thy splendor,
The Crucified thy praise;
His laud and benediction
Thy ransomed people raise.

With jasper glow thy bulwarks,
Thy streets with emeralds blaze;
The sardis and the topaz
Unite in thee their rays;
Thine ageless walls are bonded
With amethyst unpriced;
The saints build up thy fabric,
The cornerstone is Christ.

Thou hast no shore, fair ocean;
Thou hast no time, bright day,
Dear fountain of refreshment
To pilgrims far away!
Upon the Rock of Ages
They raise thy holy tower;
Thine is the victor’s laurel
And thine the golden dower.

O sweet and blessèd country,
The home of God’s elect!
O sweet and blessèd country,
That eager hearts expect!
Jesus, in mercy bring us,
To that dear land of rest;
Who art, with God the Father,
And Spirit, ever blest.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_thee_o_god_our_constraint_praise.php

For Thee, O God, our constant praise
In Zion waits, Thy chosen seat;
Our promised altars we will raise,
And there our zealous vows complete.

O Thou, Who to my humble prayer
Didst always bend Thy listening ear,
To Thee shall all mankind repair,
And at Thy gracious throne appear.

Our sins, though numberless, in vain,
To stop Thy flowing mercy try;
Whilst Thou o’erlook’st the guilty stain,
And washest out the crimson dye.

Blest is the man, who, near Thee placed,
Within Thy sacred dwelling lies!
While we, at humbler distance, taste
The vast delights Thy temple gives.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_this_new_year.php

For this New Year we humbly ask Your grace;
Help us to always see Your loving face
Shining upon us, bringing peace within,
Keeping our feet from paths of mortal sin.

Dear Lord, we ask that we would always be
Open to You, and that all men may see
In how we treat them that we’ve made a pact.
To let Your love shine through our ev’ry act.

Within our fam’lies may we know Your peace;
As we share moments let our love increase.
Teach us to share with those we truly love
As we would do so in that home above.

Now for Your church, Lord, we would give You thanks,
All kinds of people making up her ranks;
Help her be true in all she longs to do
That ev’ry act shall praise and honor You.

For this Your world, dear Lord, we beg You now
Beat ev’ry sword blade into humble plow;
We seek that peace that we can help to bring
When we acknowledge You as Lord and King.

For me, O Lord, this too I simply ask;
Help me to not shirk my appointed task,
Teach me to trust, Lord, walking day by day,
In simple faith that You show me Your way.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_those_tears_i_died.php

You said You'd come and share all my sorrows,
You said You'd be there for all my tomorrows;
I came so close to sending You away,
But just like You promised You came there to stay;
I just had to pray!

And Jesus said, "Come to the water, stand by My side,
I know you are thirsty, you won't be denied;
I felt ev'ry teardrop when in darkness you cried,
And I strove to remind you that for those tears I died."

Your goodness so great I can't understand,
And, dear Lord, I know that all this was planned;
I know You're here now, and always will be,
Your love loosed my chains and in You I'm free;
But Jesus, why me?

And Jesus said, "Come to the water, stand by My side,
I know you are thirsty, you won't be denied;
I felt ev'ry teardrop when in darkness you cried,
And I strove to remind you that for those tears I died."

Jesus, I give You my heart and my soul,
I know that without God I'd never be whole;
Savior, You opened all the right doors,
And I thank You and praise You from earth's humble shores;
Take me, I'm Yours.

And Jesus said, "Come to the water, stand by My side,
I know you are thirsty, you won't be denied;
I felt ev'ry teardrop when in darkness you cried,
And I strove to remind you that for those tears I died."


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_those_we_love_within_the_veil.php

For those we love within the veil,
Who once were comrades of our way,
We thank Thee, Lord; for they have won
To cloudless day.

And life for them is life indeed,
The splendid goal of earth’s strait race;
And where no shadows intervene
They see Thy face.

Not as we knew them any more,
Toil worn, and sad with burdened care:
Erect, clear eyed, upon their brows
Thy Name they bear.

Free from the fret of mortal years,
And knowing now Thy perfect will,
With quickened sense and heightened joy,
They serve Thee still.

O fuller, sweeter is that life,
And larger, ampler is the air:
Eye cannot see nor heart conceive
The glory there;

Nor know to what high purpose Thou
Dost yet employ their ripened powers,
Nor how at Thy behest they touch
This life of ours.

There are no tears within their eyes;
With love they keep perpetual tryst;
And praise and work and rest are one
With Thee, O Christ.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_thy_dear_saints.php

For Thy dear saints, O Lord,
[or, For Thy dear saint, O Lord,]
Who strove in Thee to live,
Who followed Thee, obeyed, adored,
Our grateful hymn receive.

They all in life and death,
With Thee their Lord in view,
Learned from Thy Holy Spirit’s breath
To suffer and to do.

Thine earthly members fit
To join Thy saints above,
In one communion ever knit,
One fellowship of love.

Jesus, Thy Name we bless,
And humbly pray that we
May follow them in holiness,
Who lived and died for Thee.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_thy_gift_of_god_thy_spirit.php

For Thy Gift of God the Spirit,
With us, in us, e'er to be,
Pledge of life and Hope of glory,
Saviour, we would worship Thee.

He who in Creation's dawning,
Brooded o'er the pathless deep,
Still across our nature's darkness
Moves to wake our souls from sleep.

Moves to stir, to draw, to quicken;
Thrusts us thro' with sense of sin;
Then, Himself, the Pledge,
He seals us— Saving Advocate within.

He, the mighty God, indwells us:
His to strengthen, help, empow'r;
His to overcome the Tempter—
Ours to call in danger's hour.

He it is, the Living Author,
Wakes to life the sacred Word;
Reads with us its holy pages,
And reveals our risen Lord.

He it is who works within us,
Teaching rebel hearts to pray;
He whose holy intercessions
Rise for us both night and day.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_thy_mercy_and_thy_grace.php

For Thy mercy and Thy grace,
Constant through another year,
Hear our song of thankfulness;
Jesus, our Redeemer, hear.

Lo! our sins on Thee we cast,
Thee, our perfect Sacrifice;
And, forgetting all the past,
Press towards our glorious prize.

Dark the future: let Thy light
Guide us, bright and morning Star:
Fierce our foes, and hard the fight;
Arm us, Savior, for the war.

In our weakness and distress,
Rock of strength, be Thou our Stay;
In the pathless wilderness
Be our true and living Way.

Who of us death’s awful road
In the coming year shall tread?
With Thy rod and staff, O God,
Comfort Thou his dying bed.

Keep us faithful, keep us pure,
Keep us evermore Thine own;
Help, O help us to endure;
Fit us for the promised crown.

So within Thy palace gate
We shall praise, on golden strings,
Thee the only Potentate,
Lord of lords, and King of kings.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_unto_us_a_child_is_born.php

For unto us a child is born,
To us a son is giv’n;
The government shall rest on him,
Th’ anointed One from Heav’n.
His name is Wonderful Counselor,
The Mighty God is He,
The Everlasting Father,
The humble Prince of Peace.

The increase of his government
And peace shall never end;
He’ll reign on David’s ancient throne
As ruler of all men.
Upheld with justice and righteousness,
Forever his kingdom will last;
The zeal of the Lord God Most High
Will bring these things to pass.

Lord Jesus, come now and reign in me,
Be Lord of my life this hour.
Come be my Counselor and my God,
My source of wisdom and power.
Watch o’er me with your Father care,
My heart and my mind, fill with peace.
I worship you, my Lord and King,
My praise will never cease.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_you_are_glorious.php

We see Jesus
For His suffering crowned
With glory and with praise
Tasting death for all men by God’s grace
Given pow’r to put all things in place
And we see Jesus

Seated at the right hand of the throne
Making intercession for His own
Upholding all things by His Word alone

CHORUS

For You are glorious
Shining victorious
Over powers and principalities
For You are glorious
Shining victorious
Disarming all Your enemies
The rulers of this world
Beneath Your feet are hurled
As You reign, our conquering King! 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_you_i_am_praying.php

I have a Saviour, He's pleading in glory,
A dear, loving Saviour, tho' earth-friends be few;
And now He is watching in tenderness o'er me:
And O that my Saviour were your Saviour too!

Refrain:
For you I am praying, for you I am praying,
For you I am praying, I'm praying for you.

I have a Father: to me He has given
A hope for eternity, blessed and true;
And soon He will call me to meet Him in heaven,
But O may He lead you to go with me too!

I have a robe: 'tis resplendent in whiteness,
Awaiting in glory my wondering view;
O when I receive it all shining in brightness,
Dear friend, could I see you receiving one too!

I have a peace: it is calm as a river,
A peace that the friends of this world never knew;
My Saviour alone is its Author and Giver,
And O could I know it was given to you!

When Jesus has found you, tell others the story,
That my loving Saviour is your Saviour too;
Then pray that your Saviour may bring them to glory,
And prayer will be answered, 'twas answered for you! 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/for_your_glory.php

You have broken me on the rock
You have laid my soul open
With my heart exposed on the rock
I am grateful to be chosen

For your glory
Your glory, Lord

You have shown me the truth
Of my self-centered soul
You have stopped my foolish ways
As you put to death
This body of flesh
You save me from a godless grave

You have taken me to the cross
Where new life to me is given
By your mercy shown at the cross
With your Son my soul is risen

©1994 Evanston Vineyard Music
Words and Music by John Willison


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/forever_and_a_day.php

Gloriously you saved me, you saved me
So miraculously you made me brand new
You welcomed me with open arms, with open arms
Unfailingly your love is a river

So I will praise you, I will praise you

I'll praise your name forever and a day
And I'll live for you into eternity
I'll praise your name forever and a day
And I'll live what I sing, what I say
What I'm learning every day

Generously you gave me, you gave me
Marvelously you made me, you made me
Relentlessly I follow, I follow
Your majesty breathtaking, so beautiful

© 2003 Raymond Badham/Hillsong Publishing
CCLI #1596342

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/forever_here_my_rest_shall_bee.php

Forever here my rest shall be,
Close to Thy bleeding side;
This all my hope, and all my plea,
For me the Savior died!

My dying Savior, and my God,
Fountain for guilt and sin,
Sprinkle me ever in Thy blood,
And cleanse, and keep me clean.

Wash me, and make me thus Thine own,
Wash me, and mine Thou art,
Wash me, but not my feet alone,
My hands, my head, my heart.

The atonement of Thy blood apply,
Till faith to sight improve,
Till hope shall in fruition die,
And all my soul be love.

I do believe, I now believe,
That Jesus died for me;
And through His blood, His precious blood,
I shall from sin be free.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/forever_i_will_be_yours.php

Heavenly Father, I come before you,
with all my cares.
I lift my hands to you in surrender,
Who can compare?
Change my heart God, for I long to be like you,
to be like you

You are light, You are holy
Forever I will be yours
You are love, You show mercy
Forever I will be yours.

Forever I will be yours
Forever I will be yours
Forever I will be yours
Forever I will be yours

©1994 Maranatha! Music
Words and Music by Greg Fadness


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/forever_my_friend.php

No one can love me the way that you do
No one as faithful and true
You never leave me though I've been untrue
I am so thankful I have a friend like you

And I love You, I love You
My Jesus, my friend
I love you
For now and forever
Your love never fails me
You're true to the end
Oh Lord, You are forever my friend

© 1996 Mercy/Vineyard Publishing
CCLI# 1596342



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/forever_trusting_in_the_lord.php

Forever trusting in the Lord,
Take heed to do His will;
So shalt thou dwell within the land,
And He thy needs shall fill.

Delight thee in the Lord, and He
Will grant thy heart’s request;
To Him commit thy way in faith,
And thus thou shalt be blest.

And He shall make Thy righteousness
Shine brightly as the light,
And as the burning noonday sun
Thy judgment shall be bright.

Rest in the Lord with quiet trust,
Wait patiently for Him;
Though wickedness triumphant seem,
Let not thy faith grow dim.




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/forever_with_the_lord.php

“Forever with the Lord!"
Amen, so let it be!
Life from His death is in that word
’Tis immortality.
Here in the body pent,
Absent from Him I roam,
Yet nightly pitch my moving tent
A day’s march nearer home

My Father’s house on high,
Home of my soul, how near
At times to faith’s foreseeing eye
Thy golden gates appear!
Ah! then my spirit faints
To reach the land I love,
The bright inheritance of saints,
Jerusalem above.

“Forever with the Lord!"
Forever in His will,
The promise of that faithful word,
Lord, here in me fulfill.
With You at my right hand,
Then I shall never fail;
Uphold me, Lord, and I shall stand,
Through grace I will prevail.

So when my latest breath
Breaks through the veil of pain,
By death I shall escape from death,
And life eternal gain.
That resurrection word,
That shout of victory:
Once more, “Forever with the Lord!"
Amen, so let it be!




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/forever.php

1. We sigh for human love, from which
A whim or chance may sever,
And leave unsought the love of God,
Tho' God's love lasts forever. 

2. We seek earth's peace in things that pass
Like foam upon the river,
While steadfast as the stars on high,
God's peace abides forever. 

3. Man's help, for which we long, gives way,
As trees in stormwinds quiver,
But mightier than all human need
God's help remains forever. 

4. Turn unto Thee our wav'ring hearts,
O Thou who failest never;
Give us Thy love and Thy great peace,
And be our Help forever!




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/forgive_me.php

Forgive me Oh, Lord for I have sinned
Help me Oh, Lord not to do it again 
Why do I sin, then do it again
Forgive me Oh, Lord for I have sinned
I know I will fall, help me rise over it all
Help me Oh, Lord not to do it again
Forgive me Oh, Lord for I have sinned 
Help me Oh, Lord not to do it again (repeat 1x)

Forgive me Oh, Lord for I have sinned 
Help me Oh, Lord not to do it again (repeat 1x)

Help me Oh, Lord (Fade Out)


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/forgive_them_o_my_father.php

“Forgive them, O my Father,
They know not what they do."
The Savior spoke in anguish,
As sharp iron nails went through.
No word of anger spoke He
To them that shed His blood,
But prayer and tenderest pity
Large as the love of God.

For me was that compassion,
For me that tender care;
I need His wide forgiveness
As much as any there.
It was my pride and hardness
That hung Him on the tree;
Those cruel nails, O Savior,
Were driven in by me.

And often I have slighted
Thy gentle voice that said:
Forgive me too, Lord Jesus,
I knew not what I did.
O depth of sweet compassion!
O love divine and true!
Save Thou the souls that slight Thee,
And know not what they do.




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/forgiven.php

Father God
I need to know the truth of who I am in you

Father God, I need to see myself
In the same way that you see me
Just as you see me

CHORUS:
There's no need to pull away, even when I fail
For you will never turn your face from me
I've got to know the truth that I can run to you
It's for freedom that you have set me free

Father God, you've forgiven all my sins
There's no need to repay you
Father God, help me walk in what you've done
Your love, your grace, and your mercy
Your great mercy

©1992 Mercy / Vineyard Publishing
Words and Music by Craig and Phyllis Musseau

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/forsaken_once_and_thrice_denied.php

Forth from the dark and stormy sky,
Lord, to Thine altar’s shade we fly;
Forth from the world, its hope and fear,
Savior, we seek Thy shelter here:
Weary and weak, Thy grace we pray;
Turn not, O Lord, Thy guests away.

Long have we roamed in want and pain,
Long have we sought Thy rest in vain;
Wildered in doubt, in darkness lost,
Long have our souls been tempest tossed;
Low at Thy feet our sins we lay;
Turn not, O Lord, Thy guests away.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/forth_from_the_dark_and_stormy_sky.php

                                  Forth from the dark and stormy sky,
                                  Lord, to Thine altar’s shade we fly;
                                  Forth from the world, its hope and fear,
                                  Savior, we seek Thy shelter here:
                                  Weary and weak, Thy grace we pray;
                                  Turn not, O Lord, Thy guests away.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/forth_in_thy_name_o_lord.php

Forth in Thy Name, O Lord, I go,
My daily labor to pursue;
Thee, only Thee, resolved to know
In all I think or speak or do.

The task Thy wisdom hath assigned,
O let me cheerfully fulfill;
In all my works Thy presence find,
And prove Thy good and perfect will.

Preserve me from my calling’s snare,
And hide my simple heart above,
Above the thorns of choking care,
The gilded baits of worldly love.

Thee may I set at my right hand,
Whose eyes mine inmost substance see,
And labor on at Thy command,
And offer all my works to Thee.

Give me to bear Thy easy yoke,
And every moment watch and pray,
And still to things eternal look,
And hasten to Thy glorious day.

For Thee delightfully employ
Whate’er Thy bounteous grace hath giv’n;
And run my course with even joy,
And closely walk with Thee to Heav’n.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/forty_days_and_forty_nights.php

Forty days and forty nights
Thou wast fasting in the wild;
Forty days and forty nights
Tempted, and yet undefiled.

Sunbeams scorching all the day;
Chilly dew-drops nightly shed;
Prowling beasts about Thy way;
Stones Thy pillow; earth Thy bed.

Should not we Thy sorrow share
And from worldly joys abstain,
Fasting with unceasing prayer,
Strong with Thee to suffer pain?

Then if Satan on us press,
Jesus, Savior, hear our call!
Victor in the wilderness,
Grant we may not faint nor fall!

So shall we have peace divine:
Holier gladness ours shall be;
Round us, too, shall angels shine,
Such as ministered to Thee.

Keep, O keep us, Savior dear,
Ever constant by Thy side;
That with Thee we may appear
At the eternal Eastertide.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/forty_days_thy_seer_of_old.php

Forty days Thy seer of old
Communed with Thee, O Most High;
Fain Thy glories to behold
And Thy glory passing by.

In the rocky cleft he bowed;
Thou, as mortal gaze might bear,
Part revealed and part in cloud,
Didst Thy secret Name declare.

Forth days of Easter-tide
Thou didst commune with Thine own;
Now by glimpses, Lord, descried,
Handled now and proved and known;

Known, most Merciful, yet veiled;
Else before the awful sight
Surely heart and flesh had failed,
Smitten with exceeding light.

Risen Master, fain would we,
Sharing those unearthly days,
Morn and eve, on shore and sea,
Watch Thy movements, mark Thy ways;

Catch by faith each glad surprise
Of Thy footstep drawing nigh,
Hear Thy sudden greeting rise—
“Peace be to you! It is I";

Secrets of Thy kingdom learn,
Read the visions open spread,
Feel Thy Word within us burn,
Know Thee in the broken bread.

So Thy glory’s skirts beside
Gently led from grace to grace,
We Thy coming may abide,
And adore Thee face to face.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/forward.php

Christ, our mighty Captain, leads against the foe,
We will never falter when He bids us go;
Tho’ His righteous purpose we may never know,
Yet we’ll follow all the way.
Refrain

Forward! forward! ’tis the Lord’s command;
Forward! forward! to the promised land;
Forward! forward! let the chorus ring:
We are sure to win with Christ, our King!

Satan’s fearful onslaughts cannot make us yield;
While we trust in Christ, our Buckler and our Shield;
Pressing ever on—the Spirit’s sword we wield,
And we follow all the way.

Refrain

Let our glorious banner ever be unfurled;
From its mighty stronghold evil shall be hurled;
Christ, our mighty Captain, overcomes the world,
And we follow all the way.

Refrain

Fierce the battle rages—but ’twill not be long,
Then triumphant, shall we join the blessèd throng,
Joyfully uniting in the victor’s song—
If we follow all the way.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/forward_through_the_ages.php

Forward through the ages, in unbroken line,
Move the faithful spirits, at the call divine;
Gifts in different measure, hearts of one accord,
Manifold the service, one the sure reward.
Refrain

Forward through the ages, in unbroken line
Move the faithful spirits at the call divine.

Wider grows the kingdom, reign of love and light;
For it we must labor, till our faith is sight.
Prophets have proclaimed it, martyrs testified.
Poets sung its glory, heroes for it died.

Refrain

Not alone we conquer, not alone we fall;
In each loss or triumph lose or triumph all.
Bound by God’s far purpose in one living whole,
Move we on together to the shining goal.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/forward_be_our_watchword.php

Forward! be our watchword, steps and voices joined;
Seek the things before us, not a look behind;
Burns the fiery pillar at our army’s head;
Who shall dream of shrinking, by our Captain led?
Forward through the desert, through the toil and fight;
Jordan flows before us; Zion beams with light.

Forward! When in childhood buds the infant mind;
All through youth and manhood not a thought behind;
Speed through realms of nature, climb the steps of grace;
Faint not, till in glory, gleams our Father’s face.
Forward, all the lifetime, climb from height to height,
Till the head be hoary, till the eve be light.

Forward! flock of Jesus, salt of all the earth,
Till each yearning purpose spring to glorious birth:
Sick, they ask for healing; blind, they grope for day;
Pour upon the nations wisdom’s loving ray.
Forward, out of error, leave behind the night;
Forward through the darkness, forward into light!

Glories upon glories hath our God prepared,
By the souls that love Him one day to be shared;
Eye hath not beheld them, ear hath never heard;
Nor of these hath uttered thought or speech a word;
Forward, marching eastward, where the heaven is bright,
Till the veil be lifted, till our faith be sight.

Far o’er yon horizon rise the city towers
Where our God abideth; that fair home is ours:
Flash the streets with jasper, shine the gates with gold;
Flows the gladdening river shedding joys untold.
Thither, onward, thither, in the Spirit’s might;
Pilgrims to your country, forward into light!

Into God’s high temple, onward as we press,
Beauty spreads around us, born of holiness;
Arch, and vault, and carving, lights of varied tone,
Softened words and holy, prayer and praise alone.
Every thought upraising to our city bright,
Where the tribes assemble round the throne of light.

Naught that city needeth of these aisles of stone;
Where the Godhead dwelleth, temple there is none;
All the saints that ever in these courts have stood,
Are but babes, and feeding on the children’s food.
On through sign and token, stars amidst the night,
Forward through the darkness, forward into light.

To th’eternal Father loudest anthems raise;
To the Son and Spirit echo songs of praise;
To the Lord of glory, blessed Three in One,
Be by men and angels endless honor done.
Weak are earthly praises, dull the songs of night:
Forward into triumph, forward into light!



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/forward_ever_forward.php

Joyful we walk on the King’s highway,
Forward, ever forward;
High is our purpose and bright is the day,
Forward, ever forward.
All to our Lord we will gladly yield,
For by His Spirit our hearts are sealed;
In us His glory shall be revealed,
Forward, ever forward. 

Christ, our Redeemer, shall lead the way
Onward, ever onward;
Nothing our progress to glory shall stay,
Onward, ever onward.
Facing the foe with an ardor high,
Plying our weapons till he must fly;
Vict’ry in Jesus shall be our cry,
Onward, ever onward. 

Courage, then, brother, our way doth lie
Upward, ever upward;
On let us press to our home in the sky,
Upward, ever upward.
Crowns are awaiting us over there,
Glories unsullied that we may share;
Hasten to win all those treasures rare,
Upward, ever upward. 

Sure shall our footsteps the pathway keep,
Trusting, ever trusting;
O’er the obstructions we boldly shall leap,
Trusting, ever trusting.
Then when the day of this world is done,
And in eternity life begun,
We shall remember that it was won
Trusting, ever trusting.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/founded_on_thee.php

Founded on Thee, our only Lord,
On Thee, the everlasting Rock,
Thy Church shall stand, as stands Thy Word,
Nor fear the storm, nor dread the shock.

For Thee our waiting spirits yearn,
For Thee this house of praise we rear;
To Thee with longing hearts we turn:
Come, fix Thy glorious presence here.

Come, with Thy Spirit and Thy power,
The Conqueror, once the Crucified;
Our God, our Strength, our King, our Tower,
Here plant Thy throne, and here abide.

Accept the work our hands have wrought;
Accept, O God, this earthly shrine;
Be Thou our Rock, our life, our thought,
And we, as living temples, Thine.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fount_of_purity.php

Oh, faint not, weary soul,
Thy Savior’s near to thee;
He now will make thee whole,
Look up to Calvary. 

Refrain:
Hail, fount of purity!
Hail, wondrous, cleansing blood!
Hail, great security!
Thou spotless Lamb of God. 

Behold thy Savior dies,
He dies, He dies for thee;
’Tis finished now, He cries,
Oh, captive soul, be free! 

Thy sins of crimson dye
Shall white as wool appear;
Now to the fountain fly,
’Twill cleanse thee, do not fear. 

Thy sins of scarlet hue
Shall all be white as snow;
There’s nothing thou canst do,
But to the fountain go. 

Behold the fountain near,
By faith, oh, plunge today;
Oh, sin-sick soul, draw near—
’Twill purge thy stain away. 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fountain_of_good_to_own_thy_love.php

Fountain of good, to own Thy love,
Our thankful hearts incline;
What can we render, Lord, to Thee,
When all the worlds are Thine?

But Thou hast needy brethren here,
Partakers of Thy grace,
Whose names Thou wilt Thyself confess
Before the Father’s face.

And in their accents of distress
Thy pleading voice is heard;
In them Thou may’st be clothed and fed
And visited and cheered.

Thy face with rev’rence and with love
We in Thy poor would see;
O may we minister to them,
And in them, Lord, to Thee.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fountain_of_grace.php

Fountain of grace, rich, full and free,
What need I, that is not in Thee?
Full pardon, strength to meet the day,
And peace which none can take away.

Doth sickness fill my heart with fear,
’Tis sweet to know that Thou art near;
Am I with dread of justice tried,
’Tis sweet to know that Christ hath died.

In life, Thy promises of aid
Forbid my heart to be afraid;
In death, peace gently veils the eyes;
Christ rose, and I shall surely rise.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fountain_of_mercy_god_of_love.php

Fountain of mercy, God of love,
Whose gifts all creatures share,
The rolling seasons as they move
Proclaim Thy constant care.

When in the bosom of the earth
The sower hid the grain,
Thy goodness marked its secret birth,
And sent the early rain.

The spring’s sweet influence, Lord, was Thine,
The seasons knew Thy call;
Thou mad’st the summer sun to shine,
The summer dews to fall.

The gifts of mercy from above
Matured the swelling grain;
And now the harvest crowns Thy love,
And plenty fills this plain.

O ne’er may our forgetful hearts
O’erlook Thy bounteous care,
But what our Father’s hand imparts
Still own in praise and prayer.

To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
The God Whom we adore,
Be glory, as it was, is now,
And shall be evermore.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fountain_of_never_ceasing_grace.php

Fountain of never ceasing grace,
Thy saints’ exhaustless theme,
Great object of immortal praise,
Essentially supreme;
We bless Thee for the glorious fruits
Thine incarnation gives;
The righteousness which grace imputes,
And faith alone receives.

Whom heaven’s angelic host adores,
Was slaughtered for our sin;
The guilt, O Lord was wholly ours,
The punishment was Thine:
Our God in the flesh, to set us free,
Was manifested here;
And meekly bare our sins, that we
His righteousness might wear.

Imputatively guilty then
Our substitute was made,
That we the blessings might obtain
For which His blood was shed:
Himself He offered on the cross,
Our sorrows to remove;
And all He suffered was for us,
And all He did was love.

In Him we have a righteousness,
By God Himself approved;
Our rock, our sure foundation this,
Which never can be moved.
Our ransom by His death He paid,
For all His people giv’n,
The law He perfectly obeyed,
That they might enter Heav’n.

As all, when Adam sinned alone,
In his transgression died,
So by the righteousness of One,
Are sinners justified,
We to Thy merit, gracious Lord,
With humblest joy submit,
Again to Paradise restored,
In Thee alone complete.

Our souls His watchful love retrieves,
Nor lets them go astray,
His righteousness to us He gives,
And takes our sins away:
We claim salvation in His right,
Adopted and forgiv’n,
His merit is our robe of light,
His death the gate of Heav’n.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/free_free_free.php
Hark! sinner, hark! we have tidings so true,
Tidings of pardon and blessings for you!
God in His word says that Christ on the tree,
Died for guilty sinners, and "Salvation is free."

Refrain:
Hear the news, sinner, free! free! free!
Why not believe it? 'Tis good news for thee.
Jesus the Just One has died on the tree,
Died for guilty sinners, and "Salvation is free."

Guilty you are, yet you know very well
Jesus has suffered to save you from hell;
Tho' now condemned, justified you may be,
Jesus paid the ransom, and "Salvation is free."

Trust not in "doing," it cannot avail.
Good resolutions and works can but fail;
"Grace, grace alone," is the saved sinner's plea,
"Not of works," the Scriptures say, "Salvation is free."

Trust not in feelings, your heart is depraved.
Trust only Jesus, who now lives to save;
Tears of repentance, tho' real they may be,
Ne'er can purchase heaven, for "Salvation is free." https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/free_from_the_law.php

Free from the law, O happy condition,
Jesus has bled and there is remission,
Cursed by the law and bruised by the fall,
Grace hath redeemed us once for all.
Refrain

Once for all, O sinner, receive it,
Once for all, O brother, believe it;
Cling to the cross, the burden will fall,
Christ hath redeemed us once for all.

Refrain

Now we are free, there’s no condemnation,
Jesus provides a perfect salvation.
“Come unto Me," O hear His sweet call,
Come, and He saves us once for all.

Refrain

“Children of God," O glorious calling,
Surely His grace will keep us from falling;
Passing from death to life at His call;
Blessèd salvation once for all.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/free_to_dance.php

This song in my heart, this song in my soul
This song I was born to sing
It's your song of freedom
Now I'm free to dance again

I'll sing in the darkness, I'll laugh in the rain
Rejoice in your love again
It's your song of freedom
Now I'm free to dance again

Your Spirit brings me liberty
Your breath of life has set me free

Jesus, your love it lifts me high
Gives me reason to run this race with joy
This song within me Lord will bless your Holy name
Jesus, I'll dance before your throne
Bring this heavenly sound to you alone
This song within me Lord will bless your Holy name

©1999 Darlene Zschech/Hillsong Music Australia
CCLI #1596342

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/free_to_run.php

Words and Music: Jim McCardell © 1992 Jim McCardell/Zane King Publishing (BMI)

Lyrics:

Free to run the race!

Yeah!

Night is falling now, blood is on the brow, free to run the race
Nailed to the wood, power in the blood, died in my place
Common legacy, common victory, free to run the race
We're all pure in Jesus eyes, running for the prize, mark of holiness
Hall of famers who've gone before us a hundred million strong
And your faith in Jesus will never fail you though the road is long
And we're...

Chorus 1:
Free to run yeah we're free to run the race (free to run the race)
Yeah we're free to run, yeah we're free to run the race (free to run the race)
Eyes of faith to fend attack, plant the banner and no turning back
Free to run, yeah we're free to run the race

Running through the rain, storms and rough terrain though on solid ground
We have guidance from the Lord, Devil's snares avoid running for the crown
We are casting off the weight, Savior's storms abate when my faith is down
You know life is in the death, free is every breath when we choose the Son
Live a life of holiness bought with a fearful price
And we're called to liberty, called a family, we're called to sacrifice
And we're...

Chorus 2:
Free to run yeah we're free to run the race (free to run the race)
Yeah we're free to run, yeah we're free to run the race (free to run the race)
King and Savior on high adored let the people sing, "Jesus is Lord!"
Free to run, yeah we're free to run the race

We're free to run, run, run

King and Savior on high adored, let the people sing, "Jesus is Lord!"
Free to run, free to run the race

Freedom, free to run the race

We're free to run

Free to run (we are free to run) the race!


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/freedom_song.php

Jesus comes He comes in power (repeat)
Pour down Your spirit like a shower (repeat)

Give us freedom and joy in your presence Lord
In Your presence we're free
Oh let us shout and dance and lift up our hands
And sing cause we are free

And He loves to come and fill me up
He loves to overflow my cup
He loves to come and bring His love 
He loves to come and bring His touch to my heart

Turn my mourning into dancing
Turn my weeping into laughing

When he comes, he comes in power (repeat)
When Jesus comes, he comes in power
Come, Lord, come in power

© 1996 worshiptogether.com songs
CCLI# 1596342


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/freely_freely.php

Words and music: Carol Owens

God forgave my sin in Jesus' name,
I've been born again in Jesus' name,
And in Jesus' name I come to you
To share His love as He told me to. 

Chorus:
He said, Freely, freely you have received;
Freely, freely give.
Go in my name and because you believe,
Others will know that I live."

All power is given in Jesus' name,
In earth and heaven, in Jesus' name;
And in Jesus' name I come to you
To share His power as He told me to.

Chorus 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/freely_freely.php

Words and music: Carol Owens

God forgave my sin in Jesus' name,
I've been born again in Jesus' name,
And in Jesus' name I come to you
To share His love as He told me to. 

Chorus:
He said, Freely, freely you have received;
Freely, freely give.
Go in my name and because you believe,
Others will know that I live."

All power is given in Jesus' name,
In earth and heaven, in Jesus' name;
And in Jesus' name I come to you
To share His power as He told me to.

Chorus 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fret_not_thyself.php

Fret not thyself, nor envious be,
When wicked workers thou shalt see,
Who prosper in their way;
For like the grass they perish soon,
And, like the herb cut down at noon,
They wither in a day.

Trust in the Lord and still do well,
Within the land securely dwell,
Feed on His faithfulness;
Delight thee also in the Lord,
And to thy heart He will accord
The good it would possess.

Yea, to the Lord thy way is known;
Confide in Him Who on the throne
Abides in power divine;
Thy righteousness He shall display;
Resplendent as the light of day,
It shall unclouded shine.

Rest in the Lord and be thou still,
With patience wait His holy will,
Enduring to the end.
Fret not though sinners’ gains increase;
Forsake thy wrath, from anger cease;
It will to evil tend.

The evil-doer soon shall die,
But those that on the Lord rely
Shall all the land obtain.
A little while and thou shalt see
That wicked man cut off shall be,
They shall be sought in vain.

Yea, thou shalt soon consider well
The place where they were wont to dwell,
And it shall not be found;
But saints shall all the land possess,
And find delight and happiness
Where fruits of peace abound.

The vile may plot against the just
Who in the Lord Jehovah trust,
But God will scorn them all;
The Lord their coming day shall see,
When broken all their power shall be,
And ruin on them fall.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/friend_i_have_called_jesus.php

A friend I have called Jesus, Whose love is strong and true,
And never fails howe’er ’tis tried, no matter what I do;
I’ve sinned against this love of His, but when I knelt to pray,
Confessing all my guilt to Him, the sin clouds rolled away.
Refrain

It’s just like Jesus to roll the clouds away,
it’s just like Jesus to keep me day by day,
it’s just like Jesus all along the way,
It’s just like His great love.

Sometimes the clouds of trouble bedim the sky above,
I cannot see my Savior’s face, I doubt His wondrous love;
But He, from heaven’s mercy seat, beholding my despair,
In pity bursts the clouds between, and shows me He is there.

Refrain

When sorrow’s clouds o’ertake me, and break upon my head,
When life seems worse than useless, and I were better dead;
I take my grief to Jesus then, nor do I go in vain,
For heavenly hope He gives that cheers like sunshine after rain.

Refrain

O, I could sing forever of Jesus’ love divine,
Of all His care and tenderness for this poor life of mine;
His love is in and over all, and wind and waves obey,
When Jesus whispers “Peace, be still!" and rolls the clouds away.

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/friend_of_sinners.php

VERSE 1:
Friend of sinners Lord of truth
I am falling in love with You
Friend of sinners Lord of truth
I have fallen in love with You


CHORUS:
Jesus I love Your name
the name by which we're saved
Jesus I love Your name
the name by which we're saved


VERSE 2:
Friend of sinners Lord of truth
I am giving my life to You
Friend of sinners Lord of truth
I have given my life to You


(REPEAT CHORUS)



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/friend_of_sinners_lord_of_glory.php

Friend of sinners, Lord of glory,
Lowly, mighty, Brother, King!
Musing o’er Thy wondrous story,
Grateful we Thy praises sing:
Friend to help us, cheer us, save us,
In Whom pow’r and pity blend—
Praise we must the grace which gave us
Jesus Christ, the sinners’ Friend.

Friend Who never fails nor grieves us,
Faithful, tender, constant, kind;
Friend Who at all times receives us,
Friend Who came the lost to find.
Sorrow soothing, joys enhancing,
Loving until life shall end;
Then conferring bliss entrancing,
Still, in heaven, the sinners’ Friend.

O to love and serve Thee better!
From all evil set us free;
Break, Lord, every sinful fetter;
Be each thought conformed to Thee:
Looking for Thy bright appearing,
May our spirits upward tend;
Till no longer doubting, fearing,
We behold the sinners’ Friend.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/friend_of_the_home.php

Friend of the home: as when in Galilee
The mothers brought their little ones to Thee,
So we, dear Lord, would now the children bring,
And seek for them the shelter of Thy wing.

Thine are they, by Thy love’s eternal claim,
Thine we baptize them in the threefold Name;
Yet not the sign we trust, Lord, but the grace
That in Thy fold prepared the lambs a place.

Lord, may Thy Church, as with a mother’s care,
For Thee the lambs within her bosom bear;
And grant, as morning grows to noon, that they
Still in her love and holy service stay.

Draw through the child the parents nearer Thee,
Endue their home with growing sanctity;
And gather all, by earthly homes made one,
In Heaven, O Christ, when earthly days are done.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/friends.php

Words: Deborah D. Smith © 1982 Meadowgreen Music Co.

Lyrics:

Packing up the dreams God planted
In the fertile soil of you
I can't believe the hope he's granted
Means a chapter in your life is through

Bridge:
But we'll keep you close as always
It won't even seem you've gone
'Cause our hearts in big and small ways
Will keep the love that keeps us strong.

Chorus:
And friends are friends forever
If the Lord's the Lord of them
And a friend will not say never
'Cause the welcome will not end
Though it's hard to let you go
In the Father's hand we know
That a lifetime's not too long
To live as friends

With the faith and love God's given
Springing from the hope we know
We will pray the joy you'll live in
Is the strength that now you show

Repeat Bridge

Repeat Chorus (x2)

To live as friends (x2)



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/friends_all_around_me.php

Friends all around me are trying to find
What the heart yearns for, by sin undermined;
I have the secret, I know where ’tis found:
Only true pleasures in Jesus abound.
Refrain

All that I want is in Jesus.
He satisfies, joy He supplies;
Life would be worthless without Him;
All things in Jesus I find.

Some carry burdens whose weight has for years
Crushed them with sorrow and blinded with tears.
Yet One stands ready to help them just now,
If they will humbly in penitence bow.

Refrain

No other name thrills the joy chords within,
And through none else is remission of sin.
He knows the pain of the heart sorely tried.
Both need and want will by Him be supplied.

Refrain

Jesus is all this poor world needs today.
Blindly they strive, for sin darkens their way.
O to draw back the grim curtains of night,
One glimpse of Jesus and all will be bright!

Refrain



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/friendship_with_jesus.php

A friend of Jesus! O what bliss
That one so vile as I
Should ever have a Friend like this
To lead me to the sky!
Refrain

Friendship with Jesus!
Fellowship divine!
O what blessèd, sweet communion!
Jesus is a Friend of mine.

A Friend when other friendships cease,
A Friend when others fail,
A Friend Who gives me joy and peace,
A Friend when foes assail!

Refrain

A Friend when sickness lays me low,
A Friend when death draws near,
A Friend as through the vale I go,
A Friend to help and cheer!

Refrain

A Friend when life’s short race is o’er
A Friend when earth is past,
A Friend to meet on Heaven’s shore,
A Friend when home at last!

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_age_to_age_they_gather.php

From age to age they gather, all the brave of heart and strong;
In the strife of truth with error, of the right against the wrong;
I can see their gleaming banner, I can hear their triumph song;
The truth is marching on.
Glory, glory, hallelujah! Glory, glory, hallelujah!
Glory, glory, hallelujah! The truth is marching on.

“In this sign we conquer," ’tis the symbol of our faith,
Made holy by the might of love triumphant over death;
“He who finds his life loseth it," forevermore it saith,
The right is marching on!
Glory, glory, hallelujah! Glory, glory, hallelujah!
Glory, glory, hallelujah! The right is marching on!

The earth is circling onward out of shadow into light;
The stars keep watch above our way, however dark the night;
For every martyr’s stripe there glows a bar of morning bright;
And love is marching on!
Glory, glory, hallelujah! Glory, glory, hallelujah!
Glory, glory, hallelujah! And love is marching on!

Lead on, O cross of martyr faith, with thee is victory;
Shine forth, O stars and reddening dawn, the full day yet shall be;
On earth His kingdom cometh, and with joy our eyes shall see,
Our God is marching on.
Glory, glory, hallelujah! Glory, glory, hallelujah!
Glory, glory, hallelujah! Our God is marching on.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_all_that_dwell_below_the_skies.php

From all that dwell below the skies,
Let the Creator’s praise arise;
Let the Redeemer’s Name be sung,
Through every land, by every tongue.

Eternal are Thy mercies, Lord;
Eternal truth attends Thy Word.
Thy praise shall sound from shore to shore,
Till suns rise and set no more.

Your lofty themes, ye mortals, bring,
In songs of praise divinely sing;
The great salvation loud proclaim,
And shout for joy the Savior’s Name.

In every land begin the song;
To every land the strains belong;
In cheerful sounds all voices raise,
And fill the world with loudest praise.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_all_thats_mortal.php

1. From All That's Mortal, All That's Vain
And from this earthly clod,
Arise my soul, and strive to gain
Sweet fellowship with God.

2. Say, what is there beneath the skies,
In all the paths thou'st trod,
Can suit thy wishes or thy joys,
Like fellowship with God.

3. Not life, nor all the toys of art,
Nor pleasure's flow'ry road,
Can to my soul such bliss impart,
As fellowship with God.

4. When I am made in love to bear,
Affliction's needful rod,
Light, sweet, and kind the strokes appear,
Through fellowship with God.

5. In fierce temptation's fiery blasts,
Or dark desertion's road,
I'm happy if I can but taste
Some fellowship with God.

6. And when the icy hand of death
Shall chill my flowing blood,
With joy I'll yield my latest breath
In fellowship with God.

7. When I, at last, to heav'n ascend,
And gain my blest abode,
There an eternity I'll spend
In fellowship with God.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_all_the_dark_places.php

From all the dark places of earth’s heathen races,
O see how the thick shadows fly!
The voice of salvation awakes every nation,
Come over and help us, they cry.
Refrain

The kingdom is coming, O tell ye the story,
God’s banner exalted shall be!
The earth shall be full of His knowledge and glory,
As waters that cover the sea.

The sunlight is glancing o’er armies advancing
To conquer the kingdoms of sin;
Our Lord shall possess them,
His presence shall bless them,
His beauty shall enter them in.

Refrain

With shouting and singing, and jubilant ringing,
Their arms of rebellion cast down;
At last every nation the Lord of salvation
Their King and Redeemer shall crown!

Refrain




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_all_the_winds_wide_quarters.php

From all the wind's wide quarters,
come, see the feast is spread,
of soul-sustaining waters,
of true and living bread;
of sorrows long-departed,
and joys beyond compare--
come, poor and humble-hearted,
the feast of life to share!

With mercy all-prevailing,
God bids the wanderer come;
in grace and peace unfailing
invites the children home.
With loving-kindness tender,
God frees us from our sins--
in glory and in splendor
the feast of life begins!

Come, claim the promise spoken!
God's purpose stands secure.
The fruitful word unbroken
shall evermore endure.
All ancient bondage ended
to sin's corrupting powers--
forgiven, freed, befriended,
the feast of life is ours!





https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_all_thy_saints_in_warfare.php

From all Thy saints in warfare, for all Thy saints at rest,
To Thee, O blessèd Jesus, all praises be addressed;
Thou, Lord, didst win the battle, that they might conquerors be;
Their crowns of living glory are lit with rays from Thee.

Praise, Lord, for Thine apostle, the first to welcome Thee,
The first to lead his brother the very Christ to see.
With hearts for Thee made ready, watch we throughout the year,
Forward to lead our brethren to own Thine Advent near.

All praise for Thine apostle, whose short lived doubtings prove
Thy perfect twofold nature, the fullness of Thy love.
On all who wait Thy coming shed forth Thy peace, O Lord,
And grant us faith to know Thee, true Man, true God, adored.

Praise for the first of martyrs, who saw Thee ready stand
To aid in midst of torments, to plead at God’s right hand.
Share we with him, if summoned by death our Lord to own,
On earth the faithful witness, in heaven the martyr’s crown.

Praise for the loved disciple, exiled on Patmos’ shore;
Praise for the faithful record he to Thy Godhead bore,
Praise for the mystic vision through him to us revealed.
May we, in patience waiting, with Thine elect be sealed.

Praise for Thine infant martyrs, by Thee with tenderest love
Called early from the warfare to share the rest above.
O Rachel! cease thy weeping: they rest from pains and cares.
Lord, grant us hearts as guileless and crowns as bright as theirs.

Praise for the light from heaven, praise for the voice of awe,
Praise for the glorious vision the persecutor saw.
Thee, Lord, for his conversion, we glorify today;
So lighten all our darkness with Thy true Spirit’s ray.

Lord, Thine abiding presence directs the wondrous choice
For one in place of Judas the faithful now rejoice.
Thy Church from false apostles forevermore defend,
And by Thy parting promise be with her to the end.

For him, O Lord, we praise Thee, the weak by grace made strong,
Whose labors and whose Gospel enrich our triumph song.
May we in all our weakness find strength from Thee supplied,
And all, as fruitful branches, in Thee, the Vine, abide.

All praise for Thine apostle, blest guide to Greek and Jew,
And him surnamed Thy brother; keep us Thy brethren true,
And grant us grace to know Thee, the Way, the Truth, the Life;
To wrestle with temptations still victors in the strife.

The son of consolation, moved by Thy law of love,
Forsaking earthly treasures, sought riches from above.
As earth now teems with increase, let gifts of grace descend,
That Thy true consolations may through the world extend.

We praise Thee for the Baptist, forerunner of the Word,
Our true Elias, making a highway for the Lord.
Of prophets last and greatest, we saw Thy dawning ray:
Make us the rather blessèd who love Thy glorious day.

Praise for thy great apostle, the eager and the bold;
Thrice falling, yet repentant, thrice charged to keep Thy fold.
Lord, make Thy pastors faithful to guard their flocks from ill,
And grant them dauntless courage, with humble, earnest will.

For him, O Lord, we praise Thee, who, slain by Herod’s sword
Drank of Thy cup of suffering, fulfilling thus Thy word.
Curb we all vain impatience to read Thy veiled decree,
And count it joy to suffer, if so brought nearer Thee.

All praise for Thine apostle, the faithful, pure, and true,
Whom underneath the fig tree Thine eye all seeing knew.
Like him may we be guileless, true Israelites indeed,
That Thy abiding presence our longing souls may feed.

Praise, Lord, for Him Whose Gospel Thy human life declared,
Who, worldly gains forsaking, Thy path of suffering shared.
From all unrighteous Gammon O give us hearts set free,
That we, whate’er our calling, may rise and follow Thee.

For that “beloved Physician," all praise, whose Gospel shows
The Healer of the nations, The Sharer of our woes.
Thy wine and oil, O Savior, and bruised hearts deign to pour,
And with true balm of Gilead anoint us evermore.

Praise, Lord, for Thine apostles, who sealed their faith today:
One love, one zeal impelled them to tread the sacred way.
May we with zeal as earnest the faith of Christ maintain,
And, bound in love as brethren, at length Thy rest attain.

Apostles, prophets, martyrs, and all the sacred throng,
Who wear the spotless raiment, who raise the ceaseless song,
For these, passed on before us, Savior, we Thee adore,
And, walking in their footsteps, would serve Thee more and more.

Then praise we God the Father, and praise we God the Son,
And God the Holy Spirit, eternal Three in One;
Till all the ransomed number fall down before the throne,
And honor, power, and glory, ascribe to God alone.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_babel_to_zion.php

Now to the holy city
The faithful gather home;
To Zion’s mount of glory 
With songs of joy they come.
Jerusalem the golden,
Jerusalem the free,
With joyful hearts and voices
The ransomed come to thee. 

Now eye to eye beholding
The way-marks on the road,
All bound in love together,
They’re coming home to God:
One mind and mouth possessing,
They speak with one accord,
And in the heights of Zion
They shout and praise the Lord. 

Sing glory to the Savior,
High over all the world;
On Zion’s heights forever
His banner is unfurled.
God’s church can be no longer
Obscured from human sight;
For see, on yonder mountain,
A city filled with light! 

No longer Babel’s bondage
The bride of Christ can hold;
God’s children now are holy,
And free from Babel’s fold:
For it is fallen, fallen,
And it shall rise no more;
We cling alone to Jesus,
As did the saints of yore.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_bethany.php

From Bethany, the Master
Comes down Mt. Olive’s slope,
And all the world is singing,
A glad new song of hope;
Cry out, O stately cedars,
Along the rugged way!
Ye vineyards, shout hosanna,
To greet this happy day!

The King of Love, in triumph
Rides through the city’s gate;
Rejected, scorned—yet Victor,
The Conqueror of hate;
O wave your green palm branches!
Exalt His matchless worth!
This King of Love shall conquer
The nations of the earth.

Not of this world His kingdom;
His power is from above;
His realm is of the spirit,
His scepter—Truth and Love;
He calls us to His service,
His banner is unfurled;
With Thee we march, O Master,
To overcome the world.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_calvary_a_cry_was_hear.php

From Calvary a cry was heard,
A bitter and heart-rending cry;
My Savior! every mournful word
Bespeaks Thy soul’s deep agony.

A horror of great darkness fell
On Thee, Thou spotless, holy One!
And all the swarming hosts of hell
Conspired to tempt God’s only Son.

The scourge, the thorns, the deep disgrace,
These Thou couldst bear, nor once repine;
But when Jehovah veiled His face,
Unutterable pangs were Thine.

Let the dumb world its silence break;
Let pealing anthems rend the sky;
Awake, my sluggish soul, awake!
He died, that we might never die.

Lord, on Thy cross I fix mine eye:
If e’er I lose its strong control,
O let that dying, piercing cry
Melt and reclaim my wandering soul.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_days_of_early_youth.php

From days of early youth, O God,
By Thee have I been taught,
And faithfully have I declared
The wonders Thou hast wrought.

O gracious God, forsake me not
When I am old and gray,
That unto those that follow me
I may Thy might display.

Thy perfect righteousness, O God,
The height of Heav’n exceeds,
O who is like to Thee, Who hast
Performed such mighty deeds?

Thou Who hast sent me many griefs,
Wilt yet my soul restore,
And out of sorrow’s lowest depths
Wilt bring me forth once more.

O turn again and comfort me,
My waning strength increase,
And for Thy faithfulness, O God,
My praise shall never cease.

Thou Holy One of Israel,
To Thee sweet songs I raise;
The soul Thou hast redeemed from death
Shall give Thee joyful praise.

My enemies that seek my hurt
Thy help has put to shame;
My thankful tongue will ceaselessly
Thy righteousness proclaim.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_death_to_life.php

From death to life, oh, what a thought!

Within my soul what change is wrought
By pow’r divine, no tongue can tell,
One thing I know—for me ’tis well;
From darkness unto light sublime,
Through my Redeemer’s matchless Name;
For this He left His home on high,
That I should not forever die. 

Refrain:
Oh, praise the Lord for victory,
From death to life He lifted me;
By His great love and pow’r divine
Eternal life is truly mine. 

There Jesus paid it all, I see,
To bring this wondrous life to me;
Life from above, oh, joy sublime!
That such a treasure should be mine;
Now in God’s Son I have a part,
Eternal life within my heart,
Translated from the shades of night,
Into the realm of glorious light. 

A resurrection, I confess,
Has taken place within my breast;
I’ve been awakened from the dead,
And now I live with Christ instead;
And when I lay this body down,
To mold and crumble in the ground,
My ransomed soul shall fly away,
To one long, bright, eternal day. 

There light and life without an end
Into eternity shall blend;
And I the Lord of life shall greet,
And worship at His blessed feet;
Then may I clasp His nail-scarred hands,
Which broke for me death’s awful bands,
By His great love; how could it be?
From death to life He lifted me. 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_deep_distress.php

From deep distress and troubled thoughts
To Thee, my God, I raised my cries;
If Thou severely mark our faults,
No flesh can stand before Thine eyes.

But Thou hast built Thy throne of grace
Free to dispense Thy pardons there,
That sinners may approach Thy face,
And hope and love, as well as fear.

As the benighted pilgrims wait
And long, and wish for breaking day,
So waits my soul before Thy gate;
When will my God His face display?

My trust is fixed upon Thy Word,
Nor shall I trust Thy Word in vain;
Let mourning souls address the Lord
And find relief from all their pain.

Great is His love, and large His grace,
Through the redemption of His Son;
He turns our feet from sinful ways,
And pardons what our hands have done.





https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_deepest_woe_i_cry_to_thee.php

From deepest woe I cry to thee;
Lord, hear me, I implore thee!
Bend down thy gracious ear to me;
I lay my sins before thee.
If thou rememberest every sin,
if nought but just reward we win,
could we abide thy presence?

Thou grantest pardon through thy love;
thy grace alone availeth.
Our works could ne'er guild remove;
yea, e'en the best life faileth.
For none may boast themselves of aught,
but must confess thy grace that wrought
whate'er in them is worthy.

And thus my hope is in the Lord,
and not in my own merit;
I rest upon his faithful word
to them of contrite spirit.
That he is merciful and just,
here is my comfort and my trust;
his help I wait with patience.





https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_depths_of_woe_i_cry_to_thee.php

1. From depths of woe I cry to Thee,
Lord, hear me, I implore Thee.
Bend down Thy gracious ear to me,
My prayer let come before Thee.
If Thou rememberest each misdeed,
If each should have its rightful meed,
Who may abide Thy presence? 

2. Thy love and grace alone avail
To blot out my transgression;
The best and holiest deeds must fail
To break sin's dread oppression.
Before Thee none can boasting stand,
But all must fear Thy strict demand
And live alone by mercy. 

3. Therefore my hope is in the Lord
And not in mine own merit;
It rests upon His faithful Word
To them of contrite spirit
That He is merciful and just;
This is my comfort and my trust.
His help I wait with patience. 

4. And though it tarry till the night
And till the morning waken,
My heart shall never doubt His might
Nor count itself forsaken.
Do thus, O ye of Israel's seed,
Ye of the Spirit born indeed;
Wait for your God's appearing. 

5. Though great our sins and sore our woes,
His grace much more aboundeth;
His helping love no limit knows,
Our utmost need it soundeth.
Our shepherd good and true is He,
Who will at last His Israel free
From all their sin and sorrow. 





https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_east_to_west_from_shore_to_shore.php

From east to west, from shore to shore,
Let every heart awake and sing
The holy Child Whom Mary bore,
The Christ, the everlasting King. 

Behold, the world’s Creator wears
The form and fashion of a slave;
Our very flesh our Maker shares,
His fallen creature, man, to save.

For this how wondrously He wrought!
A maiden, in her lowly place,
Became, in ways beyond all thought,
The chosen vessel of His grace.

She bowed her to the angel’s word
Declaring what the Father willed,
And suddenly the promised Lord
That pure and hallowed temple filled.

He shrank not from the oxen’s stall,
He lay within the manger bed,
And He whose bounty feedeth all
At Mary’s breast Himself was fed.

And while the angels in the sky
Sang praise above the silent field,
To shepherds poor the Lord Most High,
The one great Shepherd, was revealed.

All glory for this blessèd morn
To God the Father ever be;
All praise to Thee, O virgin born,
All praise, O Holy Ghost, to Thee.




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_eternity_o_god.php

1. From eternity, O God,
In Thy Son Thou didst elect me;
Therefore, Father, on life's road
Graciously to heaven direct me;
Send to me Thy Holy Spirit
That His gifts I may inherit. 

2. Though alive, I'm dead in sin,
Lost to all good things by nature.
Holy Ghost, change me within,
Make of me a new-born creature;
For the flesh works ruination
And can never gain salvation. 

3. Drive away the gloomy night
Of my heart's perverse reflection;
Quench all thoughts that are not right,
Hold my reason in subjection;
Grant that I from Thee, with yearning,
Wisdom always may be learning. 

4. Oh, create a heart in me
That in Thee, my God, believeth
And o'er the iniquity
Of my sins most truly grieveth.
When dark hours of woe betide me,
In the wounds of Jesus hide me. 

5. As a branch upon a vine
In my blessed Lord implant me;
Ever of my Head divine
To remain a member grant me.
Oh, let Him, my Lord and Savior,
Be my Life and Love forever! 

6. Faith and hope and charity
Graciously, O Father, give me;
Be my Guardian constantly
That the devil may not grieve me;
Grant me humbleness and gladness,
Peace and patience in my sadness.




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_every_spire_on_christmas_eve.php

From every spire on Christmas Eve, the Christmas bells ring clearly out
Their message of goodwill and peace, with many a call and silver shout.
For faithful hearts, the angels’ song still echoes in the frosty air,
And by the altar low they bow, in adoration and in prayer.

A thousand blessed memories throng, the stars are holy signs to them,
And from the eyes of every child looks forth the Babe of Bethlehem;
But there are others, not like these, whose brows are sad, whose hopes are 
crossed,
To whom the season brings no cheer, and life’s most gracious charm is lost.

To whom that story, old and sweet, is but a fable at the best,
The Christmas music mocks their ears, and life has naught of joy or rest.
Oh! for angel’s voice to pierce the clouds of grief that over them rise,
The mists of doubt and unbelief that veil the blue of Christmas skies.

That they, at last, may see the Light which shines from Bethlehem, and unfold
For Christ the treasures of their hearts, richer than spicery or gold.
Hope of the ages, draw Thou near, till all the earth shall own Thy sway,
And when Thou reignest in every heart it will, indeed, be Christmas Day.







https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_every_stormy_wind_that_blows.php

From every stormy wind that blows,
From every swelling tide of woes,
There is a calm, a sure retreat;
’Tis found beneath the mercy seat.

There is a place where Jesus sheds
The oil of gladness on our heads;
A place than all besides more sweet;
It is the blood bought mercy seat.

There is a scene where spirits blend,
Where friend holds fellowship with friend;
Though sundered far, by faith they meet
Around one common mercy seat.

There, there, on eagles’ wings we soar,
And time and sense seem all no more;
And heaven comes down, our souls to greet,
And glory crowns the mercy seat.

Oh, let my hand forget her skill,
My tongue be silent, cold, and still,
This bounding heart forget to beat,
If I forget the mercy seat!


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_foes_that_would_the_land_devour.php

From foes that would the land devour,
From guilty pride and lust of power,
From wild sedition’s lawless hour,
From yoke of slavery,

From blinded zeal by faction led,
From giddy change by fancy bred,
From poisonous error’s serpent head
Good Lord, preserve us free!

Defend, O God! with guardian hand,
The laws and ruler of our land,
And grant our Church Thy grace to stand
In faith and unity!



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_glory_to_glory.php

From glory to glory I see You
The more I know You
The greater is my love for You

My God, just like a good potter
Break me, transform me
Mould me to Your own image, my Lord 

CHORUS

I want to be more like You
To see the world just like You do
Come and fill me with Your Holy Spirit
And I will show the world Your love



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_glory_to_glory_advancing.php

From glory to glory advancing, we praise thee, O Lord;
Thy Name with the Father and Spirit be ever adored.

From strength unto strength we go forward on Sion’s highway,
To appear before God in the city of infinite day.

Thanksgiving, and glory and worship, and blessing and love,
One heart and one song have the saints upon earth and above.

Evermore, O Lord, to Thy servants Thy presence be nigh;
Ever fit us by service on earth for Thy service on high.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_glory_unto_glory.php

“From Glory unto Glory!" Be this our joyous song,
As on the King’s own highway we bravely march along!
“From Glory unto Glory!" O word of stirring cheer,
As dawns the solemn brightness of one more glad new year.

Our own belovèd Master “hath many things to say."
Look forward to His teaching, unfolding day by day;
To whispers of His Spirit, to insight clear and sweet,
To blessèd consolation, while resting at His feet.

“From Glory unto Glory!" Our faith hath seen the King.
We own His matchless beauty, adoringly we sing;
But He hath more to show us! O thought of untold bliss!
And on we press rejoicing in blessèd hope to this:—

To marvelous outpourings of ‘treasures new and old,’
To largess of His bounty, paid in the King’s own gold,
To glorious expansion of mysteries of grace,
To radiant unveilings of brightness from His face.

“From Glory unto Glory!" What great things He hath done,
What wonders He hath shown us, what triumphs He hath won!
We marvel at the record of blessings of the year!
But sweeter still than Christmas rings out His promise clear—

That “greater things," far greater, our longing eyes shall see!
We can but wait and wonder what “greater things" shall be!
But glorious fulfillments rejoicingly we claim,
While pleading in the power of His prevailing Name.

“From Glory unto Glory!" What mighty blessings crown
The lives for which our Lord hath laid His own so freely down!
Omnipotence to keep us, omniscience, too, to guide,
Jehovah’s blessèd presence within us to abide!

The fullness of His blessing encompasseth our way;
The fullness of His promise crowns every brightening day;
The fullness of His glory is beaming from above,
While more and more we realize the fullness of His love.

“From Glory unto Glory!" Without a shade of care,
Because the Lord Who loves us will every burden bear;
Because we trust Him fully, and know that He will guide,
And know that He will keep us at His belovèd side.

“From Glory unto Glory!" Though tribulation fall,
It cannot touch our treasure, when Christ is All in All!
Whatever lies before us, there can be naught to fear,
For what are pain and sorrow when Jesus Christ is near?

“From Glory unto Glory!" O marvels of the Word!
“With open face beholding the glory of the Lord,"
We, even we (O wonder!) “are changed into the same,"
The image of our Savior, to glorify His Name.

Abiding in His presence, and walking in the light,
And seeking to do always what is “pleasing in His sight";
We look to Him to keep us “all glorious within,"
Because the blood of Jesus is cleansing from all sin.

The things behind forgetting, we only gaze before
“From Glory unto Glory," that “shineth more and more,"
Because our Lord hath said it, that such shall be our way,
(O splendor of the promise!) “unto the perfect day."

“From Glory unto Glory!" Our fellow travelers still
Are gathering on the journey! The bright electric thrill
Of quick, instinctive union, more frequent and more sweet,
Shall swiftly pass from heart to heart in true and tender beat.

And closer yet, and closer, the golden bonds shall be,
Enlinking all who love our Lord in pure sincerity;
And wider yet, and wider, shall circling glory glow,
As more and more are taught our God’s mighty love to know.

O ye who seek the Savior, look up in faith and love;
Come up into the sunshine, so bright and warm above!
No longer tread the valley, but, clinging to His hand,
Ascend the shining summits and view the glorious land.

Our harp notes should be sweeter, our trumpet tones more clear,
Our anthems ring so grandly that all the world must hear!
O royal be our music, for who hath cause to sing
Like choruses of saved ones, the children of the King?

O, let our adoration for all that He hath done
Peal out beyond the heavens, while voice and life are one;
And let our consecration be real, and deep, and true.
O even now our hearts bow, and joyful vows renew!

“In full and glad surrender we give ourselves to Thee,
Thine utterly, and only, and evermore to be!
O Son of God, Who lov’st us, we will be Thine alone,
Our being and possessions, shall henceforth be Thine own!"

Now onward, ever onward, “from strength to strength" we go,
While “grace for grace" abundant shall from His fullness flow,
To glory’s full fruition, from glory’s foretaste here,
Until His very presence crown happiest new year.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_god_shall_not_divide_me.php

From God shall naught divide me,
For He is true for aye
And on my path will guide me,
Who else should often stray.
His right hand holdeth me;
For me He truly careth,
My burdens ever beareth,
Wherever I may be.

When man’s help and affection
Shall unavailing prove,
God grants me His protection
And shows His power and love.
He helps in every need,
From sin and shame redeems me,
From chains and bonds reclaims me,
Yea, e’en from death I’m freed.

God shall be my Reliance
In sorrow’s darkest night;
Its dread I bid defiance
When He is at my right.
I unto Him commend
My body, soul, and spirit—
They are His own by merit—
All’s well then at the end.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_god_the_father.php

From God the Father, virgin-born
To us the only Son came down;
By death the font to consecrate,
The faithful to regenerate.

Beginning from His home on high
In human flesh He came to die;
Creation by His death restored,
And shed new joys of life abroad.

Glide on, O glorious Sun, and bring
The gift of healing on Your wing;
To every dull and clouded sense
The clearness of Your light dispense.

Abide with us, O Lord, we pray;
The gloom of darkness chase away;
Your work of healing, Lord, begin,
And take away the stain of sin.

Lord, once You came to earth’s domain
And, we believe, shall come again;
Be with us on the battlefield,
From every harm Your people shield.

To You, O Lord, all glory be
For this Your blest epiphany;
To God Whom all His hosts adore,
And Holy Spirit evermore.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_greenlands_icy_mountains.php

From Greenland’s icy mountains, from India’s coral strand;
Where Afric’s sunny fountains roll down their golden sand:
From many an ancient river, from many a palmy plain,
They call us to deliver their land from error’s chain.

What though the spicy breezes blow soft o’er Ceylon’s isle;
Though every prospect pleases, and only man is vile?
In vain with lavish kindness the gifts of God are strown;
The heathen in his blindness bows down to wood and stone.

Shall we, whose souls are lighted with wisdom from on high,
Shall we to those benighted the lamp of life deny?
Salvation! O salvation! The joyful sound proclaim,
Till earth’s remotest nation has learned Messiah’s Name.

Waft, waft, ye winds, His story, and you, ye waters, roll
Till, like a sea of glory, it spreads from pole to pole:
Till o’er our ransomed nature the Lamb for sinners slain,
Redeemer, King, Creator, in bliss returns to reign.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_heaven_above_to_earth_i_come.php

From Heaven above to earth I come,
To bear good news to every home;
Glad tidings of great joy I bring,
Whereof I now will say and sing.

To you, this night, is born a Child
Of Mary, chosen mother mild;
This tender Child of lowly birth,
Shall be the joy of all your earth.

’Tis Christ our God, Who far on high
Had heard your sad and bitter cry;
Himself will your Salvation be,
Himself from sin will make you free.

He brings those blessings long ago
Prepared by God for all below;
That in His heavenly kingdom blest
You may with us forever rest.

These are the tokens ye shall mark,
The swaddling clothes and manger dark;
There shall ye find the young Child laid,
By Whom the heavens and earth were made.

Now let us all, with gladsome cheer,
Follow the shepherds, and draw near
To see this wondrous Gift of God,
Who hath His own dear Son bestowed.

Give heed, my heart, lift up thine eyes!
What is it in yon manger lies?
Who is this Child, so young and fair?
The blessèd Christ Child lieth there!

Welcome to earth, Thou noble Guest,
Through Whom e’en wicked men are blest!
Thou com’st to share our misery,
What can we render, Lord, to Thee!

Ah, Lord, Who hast created all,
How hast Thou made Thee weak and small,
To lie upon the coarse dry grass,
The food of humble ox and ass.

Were earth a thousand times as fair,
Beset with gold and jewels rare,
She yet were far too poor to be
A narrow cradle, Lord, for Thee.

For velvets soft and silken stuff
Thou hast but hay and straw so rough,
Whereon Thou King, so rich and great,
As ’twere Thy heaven, art throned in state.

Thus hath it pleased Thee to make plain
The truth to us, poor fools and vain,
That this world’s honor, wealth and might
Are naught and worthless in Thy sight.

Ah, dearest Jesus, holy Child,
Make Thee a bed, soft, undefiled,
Here in my poor heart’s inmost shrine,
That I may evermore be Thine.

My heart for very joy doth leap,
My lips no more can silence keep,
I too must sing, with joyful tongue,
That sweetest ancient cradle song.

Glory to God in highest Heaven,
Who unto man His Son hath given,
While angels sing, with pious mirth,
A glad New Year to all the earth.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_heaven_you_came.php

From heaven You came,
Helpless babe,
Entered our world,
Your glory veiled;
Not to be served
But to serve,
And give Your life
That we might live.

This is our God,
The Servant King,
He calls us now
To follow Him,
To bring our lives
As a daily offering
Of worship to
The Servant King.

There in the garden
Of tears,
My heavy load
He chose to bear;
His heart with sorrow
Was torn,
‘Yet not My will
But Yours,’ He said.

This is our God,
The Servant King,
He calls us now
To follow Him,
To bring our lives
As a daily offering
Of worship to
The Servant King.

Come see His hands
And His feet,
The scars that speak
Of sacrifice;
Hands that flung stars
Into space
To cruel nails
Surrendered.

This is our God,
The Servant King,
He calls us now
To follow Him,
To bring our lives
As a daily offering
Of worship to

The Servant King.

So let us learn
How to serve,
And in our lives
Enthrone Him;
Each other’s needs
To prefer,
For it is Christ
We’re serving. 

This is our God,
The Servant King,
He calls us now
To follow Him,
To bring our lives
As a daily offering
Of worship to
The Servant King.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_heavens_height.php

From heaven's height Christ spake to call
the gentiles' great apostle, Paul,
whose doctrine, like the thunder, sounds
to the wide world's remotest bounds.

O bliss of Paul, beyond all though,
to paradise, yet living, caught!
He hears the heavenly mysteries there,
which mortal tongue cannot declare.

The word's good seed abroad he flings;
straightway a mighty harvest springs,
and fruits of holy deeds supply
God's everlasting granary.

The lamp his burning faith displays
has filled the world with glorious rays;
that darkness' realm may be o'erthrown,
and Christ may reign, and reign alone.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_highest_heavn.php

From highest Heav’n the eternal Son,
With God the Father ever One,
Came down to suffer and to die;
For love of sinful man He bore
Our human griefs and troubles sore,
Our load of guilt and misery.

Rejoice, ye saints of God, and praise
The Lamb Who died, His flock to raise
From sin and everlasting woe;
With angels round the throne above
O tell the wonders of His love,
The joys that from His mercy flow.

In darkest shades of night we lay,
Without a beam to guide our way,
Or hope of aught beyond the grave;
But He has brought us life and light,
And opened Heaven to our sight,
And lives forever strong to save.

Rejoice, ye saints of God, rejoice;
Sing out, and praise with cheerful voice
The Lamb Whom Heav’n and earth adore;
To Him Who gave His only Son,
To God the Spirit, with Them One,
Be praise and glory evermore.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_home_of_quiet_peace.php

From homes of quiet peace

We lift up hands of prayer,
And those Thou gavest us to love
Commend, Lord, to Thy care.

In perils of the sea
Watch o’er them day by day;
In perils of the common life
Be Thou their Strength and Stay.

Let Thine almighty arm
Be their defense and shield;
And whosoever’s cause is Thine
To them the victory yield.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_lands_that_see_the_sun_arise.php

From lands that see the sun arise,
To earth’s remotest boundaries,
The virgin born today we sing,
The Son of Mary, Christ the King.

Blest Author of this earthly frame,
To take a servant’s form He came,
That liberating flesh by flesh,
Whom He had made might live afresh.

In that chaste parent’s holy womb,
Celestial grace hath found its home:
And she, as earthly bride unknown,
Yet call that Offspring blest her own.

The mansion of the modest breast
Becomes a shrine where God shall rest:
The pure and undefiled one
Conceived in her womb the Son.

That Son, that royal Son she bore,
Whom Gabriel’s voice had told afore:
Whom, in his Mother yet concealed,
The Infant Baptist had revealed.

The manger and the straw He bore,
The cradle did He not abhor:
A little milk His infant fare
Who feedeth even each fowl of air.

The heavenly chorus filled the sky,
The angels sang to God on high,
What time to shepherds watching lone
They made creation’s Shepherd known.

All honor, laud, and glory be,
O Jesu, virgin born, to Thee;
All glory, as is ever meet,
To the Father and to Paraclete.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_north_and_south_and_east_and_west.php



From north and south and east and west,
When shall the peoples, long unblest,
All find their everlasting rest,
O Christ, in Thee?

When shall the climes of ageless snow
Be with the Gospel light aglow,
And all men their Redeemer know,
O Christ, in Thee?

When on each southern balmy coast,
Shall ransomed men, in countless host,
Rise, heart and voice, to make sweet boast,
O Christ, in Thee?

O when in all the Orient lands,
From cities white, and flaming sands,
Shall men lift dedicated hands,
O Christ, in Thee?

O when shall heathen darkness roll
Away in light, from pole to pole,
And endless day by every soul
Be found in Thee?

Bring, Lord, the long predicted hour,
The ages’ diadem and flower,
When all shall find their refuge, tower,
And home in Thee!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_ocean_unto_ocean.php



From ocean unto ocean, our land shall own Thee Lord,
And, filled with true devotion, obey Thy sovereign Word:
Our prairies and our mountains, the woods and fertile field,
Our rivers, lakes and fountains, to Thee shall tribute yield.

O Christ, for Thine own glory, and for our country’s weal,
We humbly plead before Thee, Thyself in us reveal;
And may we know, Lord Jesus, the touch of Thy dear hand;
And, healed of our diseases, the tempter’s power withstand.

Where error smites with blindness, enslaves and leads astray,
Do Thou in lovingkindness proclaim Thy Gospel day,
Till all the tribes and races that dwell in this fair land,
Adorned with Christian graces, within Thy courts shall stand.

Our Savior King, defend us, and guide where we should go;
Forth with Thy message send us, Thy love and light to show,
Till, fired with true devotion, enkindled by Thy word,
From ocean unto ocean our land shall own Thee Lord.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_olives_hill.php



From Olive’s Hill, the multitude upgazing,
Beheld, until the Savior passed from view;
But radiant heralds uttered words of promise,
He Who has gone shall come again to you.
Refrain

Again, again, the nations shall behold Him!
Again, again, enrobed in majesty;
In clouds of glory every eye shall see Him,
Again, again, the King of Glory see!

Again, but not in weakness or in sorrow;
Again, but not for bitter pain and loss;
The Son of God shall come in glory splendid,
Again, but not to bear shame’s bitter cross.

Refrain

O Zion, clothe thyself in raiment holy;
Lift up thine eyes to greet thy coming King;
Rejoice, rejoice, no more be robed in sorrow,
Rejoice, O Zion, lift thy voice and sing.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_out_the_cloud_of_amber_light.php



From out the cloud of amber light,
Borne on the whirlwind from the north,
Four living creatures winged and bright
Before the prophet’s eyes came forth.

The voice of God was in the four
Beneath that awful crystal mist,
And every wondrous form they wore
Foreshadowed an evangelist.

The lion-faced, he told abroad
The strength of love, the strength of faith;
He showed th’almighty Son of God,
The Man divine Who won by death.

O Lion of the royal tribe,
Strong Son of God, and strong to save,
All power and honor we ascribe
To Thee Who only makest brave.

For strength to love, for will to speak,
For fiery crowns by martyrs won,
For suffering patience, strong and meek,
We praise Thee, Lord, and Thee alone.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_out_the_cloud_of_fiery_light.php



From out the cloud of fiery light,
borne on the whirlwind from the north,
four living creatures winged and bright
before the prophet's eye came forth.

The voice of God was in the four
beneath that awful crystal mist,
and every wondrous form they wore
foreshadowed an evangelist.

The lion-faced, he told abroad
the strength of love, the strength of faith;
he showed the almighty Son of God,
the man divine who won by death.

O Lion of the Royal Tribe, 
strong Son of God, and strong to save,
all power and honor we ascribe
to thee who only makest brave.

For strength to love, for will to speak,
for fiery crowns by martyrs won,
for suffering patience, strong and meek,
we praise thee, Lord, and thee alone.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_out_the_depths_i_cry.php



From out the depths I cry, O Lord, to Thee,
Lord, hear my call.
I love Thee, Lord, for Thou dost heed my plea,
Forgiving all.
If Thou dost mark our sins, who then shall stand?
But grace and mercy dwell at Thy right hand.

I wait for God, the Lord, and on His Word
My hope relies;
My soul still waits and looks unto the Lord
Till light arise.
I look for Him to drive away my night,
Yea, more than watchmen look for morning light.

Hope in the Lord, ye waiting saints, and He
Will well provide;
For mercy and redemption full and free
With Him abide.
From sin and evil, mighty though they seem,
His arm almighty will His saints redeem.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_over_hill_and_plain.php

From over hill and plain there comes the signal strain,
’Tis loyalty, loyalty, loyalty to Christ;
Its music rolls along, the hills take up the song,
Of loyalty, loyalty, yes, loyalty to Christ.
Refrain

“On to victory! On to victory!"
Cries our great Commander, “On!"
We’ll move at His command,
We’ll soon possess the land,
Through loyalty, loyalty,
Yes, loyalty to Christ.

O hear, ye brave, the sound that moves the earth around,
’Tis loyalty, loyalty, loyalty to Christ;
Arise to dare and do, ring out the watchword true,
Of loyalty, loyalty, yes, loyalty to Christ.

Refrain

Come, join our loyal throng, we’ll rout the giant wrong,
’Tis loyalty, loyalty, loyalty to Christ;
Where Satan’s banners float we’ll send the bugle note,
Of loyalty, loyalty, yes, loyalty to Christ.

Refrain

The strength of youth we lay at Jesus’ feet today,
’Tis loyalty, loyalty, loyalty to Christ;
His Gospel we’ll proclaim, throughout the world’s domain,
Of loyalty, loyalty, yes, loyalty to Christ.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_starry_skies_descending.php

From starry skies descending,
Thou comest, glorious King,
A manger low Thy bed,
In winter's icy sting;

O my dearest Child most holy,
Shudd'ring, trembling in the cold!
Great God, Thou lovest me!
What suff'ring Thou didst bear,
That I near Thee might be!

Thou art the world's Creator,
God's own and true Word,
Yet here no robe, no fire
For Thee, Divine Lord.

Dearest, fairest, sweetest Infant,
Dire this state of poverty.
The more I care for Thee,
Since Thou, o Love Divine,
Will'st now so poor to be.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_that_dear_cross.php

From that dear cross where Jesus died,
Calv’ry’s stream is flowing;
From bleeding hands and feet and side,
Calv’ry’s stream is flowing.
Refrain

Calv’ry’s stream is flowing,
Calv’ry’s stream is flowing;
Flowing so free for you and for me,
Calv’ry’s stream is flowing.

Come, wash the stain of sin away,
Calv’ry’s stream is flowing;
Come, while ’tis called salvation’s day,
Calv’ry’s stream is flowing.

Refrain

For every contrite, wounded soul,
Calv’ry’s stream is flowing;
Step in just now, and be made whole,
Calv’ry’s stream is flowing.

Refrain

For every weary, aching heart,
Calv’ry’s stream is flowing;
A tender healing to impart,
Calv’ry’s stream is flowing.

Refrain

With life and peace upon its tide,
Calv’ry’s stream is flowing;
Sweet blessings down the ages glide,
Calv’ry’s stream is flowing.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_the_beginning.php

Words: Matt Lusk © 2003

Lyrics:

You loved me from the beginning, You loved me through the years
You loved me in my quiet times, You loved me in my tears
You loved me through my trials, You loved me through my fears
And because Your love was with me, I knew that You were here

Chorus:
Oh I may not be here on the day You come (on the day You come)
My time may have run out long before
But to be absent from this life is to be in the presence of the Lord
And I’ll be with my Jesus I adore

Every day I see something new revealed to me
And consequently I will never be the same
And in every new miracle is a love I find unavoidable
Oh Lord there is a power in Your name

Repeat Chorus

Repeat Verse 1


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_the_cross.php



From the cross uplifted high,
Where the Savior deigns to die,
What melodious sounds we hear,
Bursting on the ravished ear!
“Love’s redeeming work is done—
Come and welcome! sinner, come!

Sprinkled now with blood the throne;
Why beneath thy burdens groan?
On My piercèd body laid,
Justice owns the ransom paid:
Bow the knee, and kiss the Son,
Come and welcome, sinner, come.

“Spread for thee, the festal board
See with richest bounty stored;
To thy Father’s bosom pressed,
Thou shalt be a child confessed,
Never from His house to roam;
Come and welcome! sinner, come!

“Soon the days of life shall end—
Lo, I come—your Savior, Friend!
Safe your spirit to convey
To the realms of endless day,
Up to My eternal home—
Come and welcome! sinner, come!"

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_the_cross_to_the_crown.php

Be strong and courageous whate’er may befall,
We know our Redeemer will answer our call;
Tho’ sorrow and trials are weighing us down,
Yet hope looks away from the cross to the crown.
Refrain

From the cross to the crown let us follow our Lord,
From the cross to the crown let us cling to His Word;
Tho’ sorrow and trials are weighing us down,
Yet faith leads us on from the cross to the crown!

His cup of affliction was filled to the brim,
And are we not willing to suffer for Him?
The robe of His glory for us He laid down,
To show us the path from the cross to the crown.

Refrain

This life is a conflict, a battle with sin,
Yet trusting in Jesus thro’ grace we shall win;
The world may oppose us, the tempter may frown,
Yet faith leadeth on from the cross to the crown.

Refrain

Tho’ friends that are dearest have gone from our sight,
’Tis only to enter the mansions of light;
Their warfare is over, their burdens laid down,
How short was their path from the cross to the crown!

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_the_depths_do_i_invoke_thee.php

From the depths do I invoke Thee,
Lord, to me incline Thine ear;
To my voice be Thou attentive,
And my supplications hear.

Lord, if Thou shouldst mark transgressions,
In Thy presence who shall stand?
But with Thee there is forgiveness,
That Thy Name may fear command.

For Jehovah I am waiting
And my hope is in His Word;
In His Word of promise given,
Yea, my soul waits for the Lord.

For the Lord my soul is waiting
More than watchers in the night;
More than they for morning watching,
Watching for the morning light.

Hope in God, ye waiting people,
Mercies great in Him abound;
With the Lord a full redemption
From the guilt of sin is found.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_the_depths_my_prayer_acendeth.php

From the depths my prayer ascendeth
Unto God on high;
Hear, O Lord, my supplication
And my cry.

None can stand unscathed and blameless
In Thy judgment just,
But the contrite in Thy mercy
Humbly trust.

Lord, my hope is in Thy promise,
And I wait for Thee
More than they who watch for morning,
Light to see.

With the Lord is tender mercy,
And redeeming love;
Israel, look for full salvation
From above.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_the_depths_of_sin_and_failure.php

From the depths of sin and failure,
From despair as black as night,
Lord, we hear our brothers calling
For deliverance and for light.
Refrain

Use us, Lord, to speed Thy kingdom;
Through us may Thy will be done;
Give us eyes to see the vision
Of a world redeemed and won.

By the love that bore in silence
Man’s contempt and Satan’s dart;
By the longing for the lost ones
That consumes the Savior’s heart;

Refrain

By the Savior’s blood that bought us,
By the peace His merits bring,
By the Spirit that constrains us
Now on earth to crown Him King;

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_the_debts_of_woe_i_rise_to_thee.php

From depths of woe I raise to Thee
The voice of lamentation;
Lord, turn a gracious ear to me
And hear my supplication;
If Thou iniquities dost mark,
Our secret sins and misdeeds dark,
O who shall stand before Thee?

To wash away the crimson stain,
Grace, grace alone availeth;
Our works, alas! are all in vain;
In much the best life faileth:
No man can glory in Thy sight,
All must alike confess Thy might,
And live alone by mercy.

Therefore my trust is in the Lord,
And not in mine own merit;
On Him my soul shall rest, His Word
Upholds my fainting spirit:
His promised mercy is my fort,
My comfort, and my sweet support;
I wait for it with patience.

What though I wait the livelong night,
And till the dawn appeareth,
My heart still trusteth in His might;
It doubteth not nor feareth:
Do thus, O ye of Israel’s seed,
Ye of the Spirit born indeed;
And wait till God appeareth.

Though great our sins and sore our woes,
His grace much more aboundeth;
His helping love no limit knows,
Our utmost need it soundeth.
Our Shepherd good and true is He,
Who will at last His Israel free.
From all their sin and sorrow.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_the_eastern_mountains.php

From the eastern mountains, pressing on, they come,
Wise men in their wisdom, to His humble home;
Stirred by deep devotion, hasting from afar,
Ever journeying onward, guided by a star. 


Refrain

Light of life that shineth ere the worlds began,
Draw Thou near, and lighten every heart of man.

There their Lord and Savior meek and lowly lay,
Wondrous Light that led them onward on their way,
Ever now to lighten nations from afar,
As they journey homeward by that guiding star.

Refrain

Thou Who in a manger once hast lowly lain,
Who dost now in glory o’er all kingdoms reign,
Gather in the heathen who in lands afar
Ne’er have seen the brightness of Thy guiding star.

Refrain

Gather in the outcasts, all who’ve gone astray,
Throw Thy radiance o’er them, guide them on their way.
Those who never knew Thee, those who’ve wandered far,
Guide them by the brightness of Thy guiding star.

Refrain

Onward through the darkness of the lonely night,
Shining still before them with Thy kindly light.
Guide them, Jew and Gentile, homeward from afar,
Young and old together, by Thy guiding Star.

Refrain

Until every nation, whether bond or free,
’Neath Thy starlit banner, Jesus, follows Thee.
O’er the distant mountains to that heavenly home,
Where nor sin nor sorrow evermore shall come.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_the_manger_to_the_cross.php

CHORUS
[D7] From The [G] Manger To The Cross, rugged [D] cross of calvary
The [A7] road that Jesus walked, for you and [D] me, all a-[D7] lone
[G] By this world forsaken, til He [D] shed His blood for me
From The [A7] Manger To The Cross, the rugged cross of cal-va-[D] ry.

[D] The story [D/F#] in The [D] Bible, it's a [G] message sad but [D] true
The life our Savior lived on earth is [A7] told
[D] Found up-[D/F#] on the [D] pages of The [G] Master's book of [D] truth
Ev'ry word so [A7] precious to my [D] soul. [D7]

CHORUS

No earthly treasures did He own, He got no wealth or fame
Weary was the path, He had to trod
Here, He suffered many things, for this world knew Him not
He died upon the cross, The Son of God.

CHORUS

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_the_rising-of_the_sun.php

From the rising of the sun 
To the going down of the same, 
The name of the Lord shall be praised. 

From the rising of the sun 
To the going down of the same, 
The name of the Lord shall be praised. 

So praise ye the Lord. 
Praise ye the Lord. 

From the rising of the sun 
To the going down of the same, 
The name of the Lord shall be praised. 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_the_table_now_retiring.php

From the table now retiring
Which for us the Lord hath spread,
May our souls, refreshment finding,
Grow in all things like our Head.

His example while beholding
May our lives His image bear;
Him our Lord and Master calling,
His commands may we revere.

Love to God and man displaying,
Walking steadfast in His way,
Joy attend us in believing,
Peace from God, through endless day.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_the_waiting_comes_the_sign.php

From the waiting comes the sign,
come, Holy Spirit, come;
from the presence comes the peace--
come, Holy Spirit, come;
from the silence comes the song--
come, Holy Spirit, come
and be to us, in truth,
the sign, the peace, the song.

In the burning is the fire--
come, Holy Spirit, come;
in the spending is the gift--
come, Holy Spirit, come;
in the breaking is the life--
come, Holy Spirit, come
and be to us, in faith,
the fire, the gift, the life.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_thee_all_skill_and_science_flow.php

From Thee all skill and science flow,
All pity, care and love,
All calm and courage, faith and hope;
O pour them from above.

And part them, Lord, to each and all,
As each and all shall need,
To rise, like incense, each to Thee,
In noble thought and deed.

And hasten, Lord, that perfect day
When pain and death shall cease;
And Thy just rule shall fill the earth
With health, and light, and peace.

When ever blue the sky shall gleam,
And ever green the sod;
And man’s rude work deface no more
The paradise of God.


The original version of this hymn started with these verses:

Accept this building, gracious Lord,
No temple though it be;
We raised it for our suffering kin,
And so, good Lord, for Thee.
Accept our little gift, and give,
To all who may here dwell,
The will and power to do their work,
Or bear their sorrows well.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_time_to_eternity.php

Time onward flows like a river vast,
While age on age it has borne to the sea;
And down this stream we have come at last,
To see time end in eternity. 

Refrain:
Eternity! Eternity!
Will you dwell with Christ in eternity? 

What is this life but a fleeting day?
Soon death will come with a stern decree;
Then one by one we must pass away,
And change from time to eternity. 

A dial true is the Book divine,
Its hands approach with a certainty
The tolling point in the death of time,
The solemn change to eternity. 

Oh, joyful day to the faithful soul
Who walks with Christ in His purity!
Life’s battle fought and the vict’ry won,
He shouts from time to eternity. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_whence_doth_this_union_arise.php

From whence doth this union arise
That hatred is conquered by love?
It fastens our souls in such ties
That nature and time can't remove.

It can not in Eden be found
Nor yet in a Paradise lost;
It grows on Immanuel's ground
And Jesus' rich blood it did cost.

My friends are so dear unto me.
Our hearts all united in love.
Where Jesus has gone we shall be.
In Yonder blest mansions above.

Oh! why then, so loath for to part.
Since we shall ere long meet again,
Engraved on Immanuel's heart.
At distance we cannot remain.

And when we shall see that bright day,
And join with the angels above;
And when these vile bodies of clay,
Are fashioned like Jesus above:

With Jesus we ever shall reign,
And all his bright glories shall see,
Singing, Hallelujah, Amen;
Amen, even so let it be.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/from_whence_this_fear_and_unbelief.php

From whence this fear and unbelief?
Hath not the Father put to grief
His spotless Son for me?
And will the righteous Judge of men
Condemn me for that debt of sin
Which, Lord, was charged on Thee?

Complete atonement Thou hast made,
And to the utmost Thou hast paid
Whate'er Thy people owed;
How then can wrath on me take place,
If sheltered in Thy righteousness,
And sprinkled with Thy blood?

If thou hast my discharge procured,
And freely in my room endured
The whole of wrath divine;
Payment God cannot twice demand,
First at my bleeding Surety's hand,
And then again at mine.

Turn then, my soul, unto thy rest!
The merits of thy great High Priest
Have bought thy liberty;
Trust in His efficacious blood,
Nor fear thy banishment from God,
Since Jesus died for thee. 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fruit_bearing.php

If ye then with Christ be risen,
Seek those things which are above;
Putting off all wrath and malice,
Walk with Him in perfect love.
Lay aside all strife and envy,
Hatred, foolishness, and pride;
None who cling to aught that’s sinful
In His kingdom shall abide. 

Refrain:
I am the Vine, I am the Vine,
Ye are the fruitful branches. 

If we’re in the Spirit living,
Let us also walk therein,
Free from guilt and condemnation—
From the servitude of sin—
Bearing holy fruits of meekness,
Temperance and love and peace,
Faith and gentleness possessing,
Daily shall our joy increase. 

Can there issue from one fountain
Both the bitter and the sweet?
Do we gather figs of thistles,
Sow the tares, expecting wheat?
So a good tree yields by nature
Perfect fruit, and that alone;
Trees corrupt are bearing evil—
By their fruits they shall be known. 

Once of sin we were the servants,
Held beneath its tyrant sway,
Free from righteousness—unholy—
But we’ve found a better way.
By the word of God obeying,
We are free from sinful strife;
Fruits of holiness we’re yielding,
And the end eternal life. 

We are dwelling in the Spirit,
By our Father’s blest design;
Through His grace we’re made partakers
Of His nature, pure, divine.
By His faith alone I’m living,
For with Christ to sin I died;
I will bear abundant fruitage,
That His name be glorified. 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/full_many_shall_come.php

Full many shall come from the east and the west
And sit at the feast of salvation,
With Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob the blest,
Obeying the Lord’s invitation.
Have mercy upon us, O Jesus!

But they who have always resisted His grace
And on their own virtue depended
Shall then be condemned and cast out from His face,
Eternally lost and unfriended.
Have mercy upon us, O Jesus!

May we too give heed when our Savior doth call
In accents persuasive and tender,
And may we be guests at His feast, one and all,
Our praise and obeisance to render.
Have mercy upon us, O Jesus!

Oh, that we the throng of the ransomed may swell,
To whom He hath granted remission!
God graciously make us in heaven to dwell
And save us from endless perdition.
Have mercy upon us, O Jesus!

God grant that I may of His infinite love
Remain in His merciful keeping
And sit with the King at His table above
When here in the grave I am sleeping.
Have mercy upon us, O Jesus!

Then ended will be, like a dream that is past,
All trial and trouble and sorrow;
All questions and doubts will be answered at last,
When dawneth eternity’s morrow.
Have mercy upon us, O Jesus!

Then Heaven will ring with an anthem more grand
Than ever on earth was recorded,
When all of the saved shall receive at His hand
The crown to the victors awarded.
Have mercy upon us, O Jesus!

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/full_salvation.php

Full salvation! full salvation!
Lo! the fountain, opened wide,
Streams thro' ev'ry land and nation
From the Saviour's wounded side.
Full salvation! full salvation!
Full salvation! full salvation!
Streams an endless crimson tide.

O the glorious revelation!
See the cleansing current flow,
Washing stains of condemnation
Whiter than the driven snow;
Full salvation! full salvation!
Full salvation! full salvation!
O the rapt'rous bliss to know!

Love's resistless current sweeping
All the regions deep within;
Thought and wish and senses keeping
Now, and ev'ry instant, clean.
Full salvation! full salvation!
Full salvation! full salvation!
From the guilt and pow'r of sin.

Life immortal, heav'n descending,
Lo! my heart the Spirit's shrine!
God and man in oneness blending—
O what fellowship is mine!
Full salvation! full salvation!
Full salvation! full salvation!
Raised in Christ to life divine!

Care and doubting, gloomy sorrow,
Fear and grief are mine no more;
Faith knows naught of dark tomorrow
For my Saviour goes before.
Full salvation! full salvation!
Full salvation! full salvation!
Full and free for evermore. 

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/full_surrender.php

Savior, ’tis a full surrender,
All I leave to follow Thee;
Thou my Leader and Defender
From this hour shalt ever be.
Refrain

I surrender all!
I surrender all!
All I have I bring to Jesus,
I surrender all.

As I come in deep contrition,
At this consecrated hour,
Hear, O Christ, my heart’s petition,
Let me feel the Spirit’s pow’r!

Refrain

No withholding—full confession;
Pleasures, riches, all must flee;
Holy Spirit, take possession!
I no more, but Thou in me.

Refrain

Be this theme my song and story,
Now and until life is o’er;
This my rapture, this my glory,
Till I reach the shining shore.

Refrain

Oh, the joy of full salvation!
Oh, the peace of love divine!
Oh, the bliss of consecration!
I am His, and He is mine.

Refrain
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fullness_of_god.php

Words and music: Keith Lancaster © 2005 Anthony K Music (ASCAP)

Lyrics:

I am kneeling (I am kneeling) before the Father (before the Father)
From Whom the earthly family (the earthly family) derives its’ name
I am praying (praying) for His power
Through His spirit in our inner being we live by Faith (we live by Faith)

Chorus:
His love (how wide, how long) surpasses knowledge (how high, how deep)
His love (how wide, how long) surpasses knowledge (how high, how deep)

I am kneeling (I am kneeling) before the Father (before the Father)
From Whom the heavenly family derives its’ name
I am praying (praying) out of His riches
You’ll be rooted and established in His love

Repeat Chorus

Bridge:
And I pray for you with all the saints
That Christ live in your hearts through faith
And be filled to the measure of all fullness of God
And I pray for you with all the saints
That Christ live in your hearts through faith
And be filled to the measure of all fullness of God

Repeat Chorus (x2)

How wide, how long, how high, how deep

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fully_persuaded.php

Fully persuaded, Lord, I believe!
Fully persuaded, Thy Spirit give;
I will obey Thy call; low at Thy feet I fall;
Now I surrender all, Christ to receive.

Fully persuaded—Lord, hear my cry!
Fully persuaded—pass me not by;
Just as I am I come, I will no longer roam,
O make my heart Thy home; save, or I die!

Fully persuaded, no more opprest,
Fully persuaded, now I am blest;
Jesus is now my Guide, I will in Christ abide,
My soul is satisfied in Him to rest!

Fully persuaded, Jesus is mine;
Fully persuaded, Lord I am Thine!
O make my love to Thee like Thine own love to me,
So rich, so full and free, Savior divine!

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fully_saved_today.php

I am fully saved today,
All my guilt is washed away,
And the love of God is flooding all my soul;
For His grace abides within,
Since I’ve been redeemed from sin,
And the precious blood of Jesus makes me whole. 

Refrain:
I am fully saved today,
I am in the narrow way;
And no evil can betide,
For I’m walking by my Savior’s side. 

I am fully saved today,
And I’m in the narrow way,
Walking with my blessed Savior hour by hour;
Though the way seems sometimes drear,
And the hosts of hell appear,
I shall ever conquer by His mighty pow’r. 

I am fully saved today,
While His word I do obey,
On the promise now by faith I calmly rest;
Not a doubt or fear I know,
While I walk with Him below,
For I’m leaning on my Savior’s loving breast. 

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/fully_surrendered.php

Fully surrendered to Jesus the Lord,
Fully surrendered, I trust in His Word;
Hath He not promised that all who believe,
Perfect salvation from Him shall receive?
Refrain

Fully surrendered, fully surrendered,
All on the altar and under the blood;
Fully surrendered, fully surrendered,
Pardoned and cleansed, hallelujah to God!

Fully surrendered, the struggle is o’er,
Now from my Savior I’ll wander no more;
Gladly the world and its pleasures forsake,
And with my Savior the narrow way take;

Refrain

Fully surrendered, to go or to stay,
Just where He needs me, His will to obey;
Humbly to follow wherever He leads,
Trusting His Word to supply all my needs.

Refrain

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/the_fast.php

The fast, as taught by holy lore,
We keep in solemn course once more;
The fast to all men known, and bound
In forty days of yearly round.

The law and seers that were of old
In divers ways this Lent foretold
Which Christ, all seasons’ King and Guide,
In after ages sanctified.

More sparing therefore let us make
The words we speak, the food we take,
Our sleep and mirth, and closer barred
Be every sense in holy guard.

In prayer together let us fall,
And cry for mercy, one and all,
And weep before the Judge’s feet,
And His avenging wrath entreat.

Thy grace have we offended sore,
By sins, O God, which we deplore;
But pour upon us from on high,
O pardoning One, Thy clemency.

Remember Thou, though frail we be,
That yet Thine handiwork are we;
Nor let the honor of Thy Name
Be by another put to shame.

Forgive the sin that we have wrought;
Increase the good that we have sought;
That we at length, our wanderings o’er,
May please Thee here and evermore.

We pray Thee, holy Trinity,
One God, unchanging Unity,
That we from this our abstinence
May reap the fruits of penitence.

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/the_father_whose_sole_begotten_son.php

The Father’s sole begotten Son
Was born, the virgin’s Child, on earth;
His cross for us adoption won,
The life and grace of second birth.

Forth from the height of Heav’n He came,
In form of man with man abode;
Redeemed His world from death and shame,
The joys of endless life bestowed.

Redeemer, come with power benign,
Dwell in the souls that look for Thee;
O let Thy light within us shine
That we may Thy salvation see.

Abide with us, O Lord, we pray,
Dispel the gloom of doubt and woe;
Wash every stain of guilt away,
Thy tender healing grace bestow.

Lord, Thou hast come, and well we know
That Thou wilt likewise come again;
Thy kingdom shield from every foe,
Thy honor and Thy rule maintain.

Eternal glory, Lord, to Thee,
Whom, now revealed, our hearts adore;
To God the Father glory be,
And Holy Spirit evermore.

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/the_fight_is_on.php

The fight is on, the trumpet sound is ringing out,
The cry “To arms!" is heard afar and near;
The Lord of hosts is marching on to victory,
The triumph of the Christ will soon appear.
Refrain

The fight is on, O Christian soldier,
And face to face in stern array,
With armor gleaming, and colors streaming,
The right and wrong engage today!
The fight is on, but be not weary;
Be strong, and in His might hold fast;
If God be for us, His banner o’er us,
We’ll sing the victor’s song at last!

The fight is on, arouse, ye soldiers brave and true!
Jehovah leads, and victory will assure;
Go buckle on the armor God has given you,
And in His strength unto the end endure.

Refrain

The Lord is leading on to certain victory;
The bow of promise spans the eastern sky;
His glorious Name in every land shall honored be;
The morn will break, the dawn of peace is nigh.

Refrain
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/the_fire_is_burning.php

I’ve been on Mount Pisgah’s lofty height,
And I’ve satisfied my longing heart’s desire;
For I caught a glimpse of glory bright,
And my soul is burning with the fire.
Refrain

O the fire is burning, yes, ’tis brightly burning,
O ’tis burning, burning in my soul;
O the fire is burning, yes, ’tis brightly burning,
O ’tis burning, burning in my soul.

I will walk with Jesus, bless His Name,
And to be like Him I ev’ry day aspire;
For His love is like a heav’nly flame,
And my soul is burning with the fire.

Refrain

I my all upon the altar lay,
As I to my closet lovingly retire;
And the flame consumes while there I pray,
And my soul is burning with the fire.

Refrain

By faith’s eye I scan the ocean’s foam,
And beyond I see the haven I desire;
There I view the beacon lights of home,
And my soul is burning with the fire.

Refrain

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/the_fires_of_the_sun_shall_be_quenched_at_last.php

The fires of the sun shall be quenched at last,
And the steadfast stars be gone;
But souls of the ransomed shall live in strength,
And they still shall be going on.
Refrain

Going on, going on,
They still shall be going on;
Forever and aye, through eternal day,
They still shall be going on.

As souls that remember and feel and thrill,
We shall live when seas are dry;
As separate beings, to love and will,
We shall live, nevermore to die.

Refrain

From glory to glory our path shall be,
And from grace to perfect grace;
Through all the wide years of eternity,
We shall look on our dear Lord’s face.

Going on, going on,
We still shall be going on;
Forever and aye, through eternal day,
We still shall be going on.




 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/the_first_noel.php

The first Noel the angel did say
Was to certain poor shepherds in fields as they lay;
In fields where they lay tending their sheep,
On a cold winter’s night that was so deep. 

Refrain

Noel, Noel, Noel, Noel,
Born is the King of Israel.

They lookèd up and saw a star
Shining in the east, beyond them far;
And to the earth it gave great light,
And so it continued both day and night.

Refrain

And by the light of that same star
Three Wise Men came from country far;
To seek for a King was their intent,
And to follow the star wherever it went.

Refrain

This star drew nigh to the northwest,
Over Bethlehem it took its rest;
And there it did both stop and stay,
Right over the place where Jesus lay.

Refrain

Then did they know assuredly
Within that house the King did lie;
One entered it them for to see,
And found the Babe in poverty.

Refrain

Then entered in those Wise Men three,
Full reverently upon the knee,
And offered there, in His presence,
Their gold and myrrh and frankincense.

Refrain

Between an ox stall and an ass,
This Child truly there He was;
For want of clothing they did Him lay
All in a manger, among the hay.

Refrain

Then let us all with one accord
Sing praises to our heavenly Lord;
That hath made heaven and earth of naught,
And with His blood mankind hath bought.

Refrain

If we in our time shall do well,
We shall be free from death and hell;
For God hath prepared for us all
A resting place in general.

Refrain


 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/the_friend_of_sinners_dies.php

He dies! the Friend of sinners dies!
Lo! Salem’s daughters weep around;
A solemn darkness veils the skies,
A sudden trembling shakes the ground.

Come, saints, and drop a tear or two
For Him who groaned beneath your load:
He shed a thousand drops for you,
A thousand drops of richer blood.

Here’s love and grief beyond degree:
The Lord of Glory dies for men!
But lo! what sudden joys we see,
Jesus, the dead, revives again!

The rising God forsakes the tomb;
The tomb in vain forbids His rise;
Cherubic legions guard Him home,
And shout Him welcome to the skies.

Break off your fears, ye saints, and tell
How high your great Deliv’rer reigns;
Sing how He spoiled the hosts of hell,
And led the monster death in chains!

Say, “Live forever, wondrous King!
Born to redeem, and strong to save;"
Then ask the monster, “Where’s thy sting?"
And, “Where’s thy vict’ry, boasting grave?"

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_f/the_friendly_beasts.php

Jesus, our Brother, strong and good,
Was humbly born in a stable rude,
And the friendly beasts around Him stood,
Jesus, our Brother, strong and good.

的," said the donkey, shaggy and brown,
的 carried His mother uphill and down,
I carried His mother to Bethlehem town;
I," said the donkey, shaggy and brown.

的," said the cow, all white and red,
的 gave Him my manger for His bed,
I gave Him hay to pillow His head;
I," said the cow, all white and red.

的," said the sheep with curly horn,
的 gave Him my wool for His blanket warm,
He wore my coat on Christmas morn;
I," said the sheep with curly horn.

的," said the dove, from the rafters high,
的 cooed Him to sleep that He should not cry,
We cooed Him to sleep, my mate and I;
I," said the dove, from the rafters high.

Thus all the beasts, by some good spell,
In the stable dark were glad to tell
Of the gifts they gave Emmanuel,
The gifts they gave Emmanuel.

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/a_handful_of_leaves.php

What! sitting at ease when there’s work to be done!
The best of the day half its circuit has run;
Yon orb to its zenith rides forth in the sky;
What! sitting at ease and the harvest so nigh!
Refrain

Oh, look on the fields, that already are white;
The Lord hath commanded to work in the light;
Beware lest, instead of the bright, golden sheaves,
We bring to Him only a handful of leaves.

What! sitting at ease, leaving others the toil
Of training the vineyard and tilling the soil;
This truth in our mind let us constantly keep,
From seed what we scatter the fruit we shall reap.

Refrain

What! sitting at ease, when a burden of care
Our brother has borne we might help him to bear;
Oh, let us be earnest, and work while we may,
The Master is calling, arise and away.

Refrain

No longer at ease we are folding our hands,
But, willing to do what the Savior commands,
We’ll work till the harvest, then gather the sheaves,
And bring to Him more than a handful of leaves.

Refrain

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/a_holy_air_is_breathing_around.php

A holy air is breathing round,
A fragrance from above;
Be every soul from sense unbound,
Be every spirit love.

O God, unite us heart to heart,
In sympathy divine,
That we be never drawn apart,
To love not Thee nor Thine.

But by the cross of Jesus taught,
And all His gracious word,
Be nearer to each other brought,
And nearer Thee, O Lord.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/a_home_in_my_heart_for_jesus.php

There’s a home in my heart for Jesus,
In the heart He has cleansed from sin;
’Tis the shrine of a deep devotion,
And my Savior abides within.

Refrain

There’s a home in my heart,
And Jesus abides within;
He will always be a friend to me,
There’s a home in my heart for Him.

There’s a home in my heart for Jesus,
There’s a sympathy rare and sweet;
There are days of divine communion,
When His presence is bliss complete.

Refrain

There’s a home in my heart for Jesus,
And He whispers that all is well;
In the light of His love abiding,
There’s a joy that no words can tell.

Refrain


 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/a_hymn_of_glory_let_us_sing.php

A hymn of glory let us sing
New songs throughout the world shall ring
Alleluia, Alleluia.
Christ, by a road before untrod
Ascendeth to the throne of God.
Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia.

The holy apostolic band
Upon the Mount of Olives stand
Alleluia, Alleluia.
And with His followers they see
Jesus’ resplendent majesty
Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia.

To Whom the angels drawing nigh,
“Why stand and gaze upon the sky?"
Alleluia, Alleluia.
“This is the Savior," thus they say.
“This is His noble triumph day."
Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia.

“Again ye shall behold Him so,
As ye have today seen Him go."
Alleluia, Alleluia.
“In glorious pomp ascending high
Up to the portals of the sky."
Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia.

O grant us thitherward to tend
And with unwearied hearts ascend,
Alleluia, Alleluia.
Unto Thy kingdom’s throne, where Thou
As is our faith, art seated now,
Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia.

Be Thou our Joy and strong Defense,
Who art our future Recompense,
Alleluia, Alleluia.
So shall the light that springs from Thee
Be ours through all eternity,
Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia.

O risen Christ, ascended Lord,
All praise to Thee let earth accord,
Alleluia, Alleluia.
Who art, while endless ages run,
With Father and with Spirit One,
Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia.

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/a_prayer_for_gods_blessing.php

Words and music © 1975 Robert E. W. Cottrill. The author grants permission to 
use this hymn for Christian worship, as long as it is not altered in any way, 
and this copyright notice is included in any printed version.

Here we would see Jesus, wearied with the journey,
We turn again to be renewed and know His touch of pow’r.
Yes, we would see Jesus thru the Scriptures shining;
Lord, lift the veil of earthly sense and meet us in this hour.

We beheld His glory, thus when homeward wending,
Our hearts will echo with the chorus of redeeming love.
We beheld His glory, and go forth to serve Him,
Till faith gives way to joyous sight in mansions up above.

Words and music © 1975 Robert E. W. Cottrill. The author grants permission to 
use this hymn for Christian worship, as long as it is not altered in any way, 
and this copyright notice is included in any printed version.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/had_he_not_loved_us.php

Had he not loved us
he had never come;
yet is he love
and love is all his way:
low to the mystery
of the Virgin's womb
Christ bows his glory--
born on Christmas Day.

Had he not loved us
he had never come;
had he not come
he need have never died,
nor won the victory
of the vacant tomb,
the awful triumph
of the Crucified.

Had he not loved us
he had never come;
still we were lost
in sorrow, sin and shame,
the doors fast shut
on our eternal home
which now stand open--
for he loved and came.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_all_hail.php

Hail this glorious Easter morning,
Night has fled away,
O’er the eastern hills the dawning
Breaks in light of day.
Sun and cloud their beauty blending,
Easter mem’ries sing,
Flowers sweet their fragrance lending,
Hail with your joy your risen King!
Refrain

Hail, all hail this Easter morning,
Hail, all hail this day of days!
Hail, all hail the sight adorning;
Hail, all hail the songs of praise!

Hail! O earth, your risen Savior,
For today He rose—
Conqueror of death forever,
Triumphed o’er His foes.
Hail again your Savior glorious,
Richest tribute bring;
Over all the world victorious,
Hail, all hail your risen King!

Refrain

Sound aloud the Easter chorus,
Send the news afar,
While in glory shining o’er us,
Beams our Morning Star.
Songs of joy, and peace, and gladness,
Let our voices sing;
Cheer each heart and banish sadness,
While we hail our risen King.

Refrain
would be lost.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_coessential_three.php

Hail, co-essential Three,
In mystic Unity!
Father, Son, and Spirit, hail!
God by Heaven and earth adored,
God incomprehensible;
One supreme, almighty Lord,
One supreme, almighty Lord.

Thou sittest on the throne,
Plurality in One;
Saints behold Thine open face,
Bright, insufferably bright;
Angels tremble as they gaze,
Sink into a sea of light,
Sink into a sea of light.

Ah! when shall we increase
Their heavenly ecstasies?
Chant, like them, the Lord Most High,
Fall like them who dare not move;
“Holy, holy, holy," cry,
Breathe the praise of silent love?
Breathe the praise of silent love?

Come, Father, in the Son
And in the Spirit down;
Glorious Triune Majesty,
God through endless ages blest,
Make us meet Thy face to see,
Then receive us to Thy breast;
Then receive us to Thy breast.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_father_son_and_holy_ghost.php



Hail! Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
One God, in Persons Three!
Of Thee we make our joyful boast,
Our songs we make of Thee.

Thou neither canst be felt nor seen,
Thou art a Spirit pure;
Thou from eternity hast been,
And always shalt endure.

Present alike in every place,
Thy Godhead we adore;
Beyond the bounds of time and space,
Thou dwell’st for evermore.

In wisdom infinite Thou art,
Thine eye doth all things see;
And every thought of every heart
Is fully known to thee.

Thou lov’st whate’er Thy hands have made;
Thy goodness we rehearse,
In shining characters displayed
Throughout our universe.

Mercy, with love and endless grace,
O’er all Thy works doth reign;
But mostly Thou delight’st to bless
Thy favorite creature, Man.

Wherefore, let every creature give
To Thee the praise designed;
But chiefly, Lord, the thanks receive,
The hearts of all mankind.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_father_whose_creating_call.php



Hail, Father, whose creating call
Unnumbered worlds attend;
Jehovah, comprehending all,
Whom none can comprehend!

In light unsearchable enthroned,
Whom angels dimly see,
The fountain of the Godhead owned,
And foremost of the Three.

From Thee, through an eternal now,
The Son, Thine offspring, flowed;
An everlasting Father Thou,
An everlasting God.

Nor quite displayed to worlds above,
Nor quite on earth concealed;
By wondrous, unexhausted love,
To mortal man revealed.

Supreme and all-sufficient God,
When nature shall expire,
And worlds created by Thy nod
Shall perish by Thy fire.

Thy Name, Jehovah, be adored
By creatures without end,
Whom none but Thy essential Word
And Spirit comprehend.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_festal_day.php



Refrain:
Hail, festal day! to endless ages known,
when God ascended to his starry throne.

Now with Lord, of new and heavenly birth,
his gifts return to grace the springing earth. Refrain

Now glows the year, with painted flowers' array,
and warmer light unbars the gates of day. Refrain

Now Christ, from gloomy hell, comes triumphing,
and field and grove with flower and leafage spring. Refrain

The reign of death o'erthrown, he mounts on high,
sent forth with joyous praise from sea and sky. Refrain

Loose now the captives, loose the prison door,
the fallen, from the deep, to light restore. Refrain

A countless people from death's fetters free,
own thee Redeemer, join and follow thee. Refrain

Creator and Redeemer! Christ our Light!
The One-begotten of the Father's might. Refrain

Co-equal, co-eternal, thou to whom
the kingdom of the world decreed shall come. Refrain

Thou, looking on our race in darkness laid,
to rescue man, true man thyself wast made. Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_gladdening_light.php



Hail, gladdening Light, of His pure glory poured,
Who is immortal Father, heavenly blest;
Highest and holiest—Jesus Christ our Lord!
Now are we come to the sun’s hour of rest;
All times are ordered in Thy Word alone,
Therefore the day and night Thy glories own.

The lights of evening now around us shine;
We hymn Thy blest humanity divine;
Worthiest art Thou at all times to be sung,
By grateful hearts, with undefilèd tongue,
Son of our God, Giver of life, alone!
Therefore shall all the worlds Thy glories own.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_harbinger_of_morn.php



Hail, harbinger of morn:
thou that art this day born,
and heraldest the Word with clarion voice!
Ye faithful ones, in him
behold the dawning dim
of the bright day, and let your hearts rejoice.

John--by that chosen name
to call him, Gabriel came
by God's appointment from his home on high:
what deeds that babe should do
to manhood when he grew,
God sent his Angel forth to testify.

There is none greater, none,
than Zechariah's son;
than this no mightier prophet hath been born:
of prophets he may claim
more than a prophet's fame;
sublimer deeds than theirs his brow adorn.

"Lo, to prepare thy way,"
did God the Father say,
"Before thy face my messenger I send,
thy coming to forerun;
as on the orient sun
doth the bright daystar morn by morn attend."

Praise therefore God most high;
praise him who came to die
for us, his Son that liveth evermore;
and to the Spirit raise,
the Comforter, like praise,
while time endureth, and when time is o'er.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_him_the_king_of_glory.php

Tell it to every kindred and nation,
Tell it far and near;
Earth’s darkest night will fade with the dawning,
Jesus will soon appear.

Refrain

Hail Him the King of glory,
Once the Lamb for sinners slain;
Tell, tell the wondrous story,
“Jesus comes to reign."

Nations again in strife and commotion,
Warnings by the way;
Signs in the heavens, unerring omens,
Herald the glorious day.

Refrain

Children of God look up with rejoicing;
Shout and sing His praise;
Blessèd are they who, waiting and watching,
Look for the dawning rays.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_holy_holy_holy_lord.php

Hail! Holy, holy, holy Lord!
Whom One in Three we know;
By all thy heavenly host adored,
By all thy church below.

One undivided Trinity
With triumph we proclaim;
Thy universe is full of thee,
And speaks thy glorious name.

Thee, Holy Father, we confess,
Thee, Holy Son, adore,
Thee, Spir't of truth and holiness,
We worship evermore.

Three Persons equally divine
We magnify and love;
And both the choirs ere long shall join,
To sing thy praise above.

Hail! holy, holy, holy Lord,
Our heavenly song shall be,
Supreme, essential One, adored
In co-eternal Three!



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_holy_light_the_world_rejoices.php

Hail, holy Light! The world rejoices
As morning breaks and shadows fly;
All nature blends her myriad voices
To greet the dayspring from on high,
To greet the dayspring from on high.

Break forth, in glory far excelling,
O Light eternal, Love divine!
Let Thy bright beams, all shades dispelling,
Around us and within us shine,
Around us and within us shine.

The heav’nly hosts fall down before Thee,
And “Holy!" cry, nor ever rest;
The saints on earth, with them, adore Thee,
Creator, Savior, Spirit blest,
Creator, Savior, Spirit blest.

O God, if we could duly praise Thee,
Could we but voice the love we see,
As sweet as song as angels raise Thee,
Our Sabbath morning hymn should be,
Our Sabbath morning hymn should be.

Accept, O Father, we entreat Thee,
The worship which Thy children bring;
O, grant us grace in Heav’n to greet Thee,
And with all saints Thy love to sing,
And with all saints Thy love to sing.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_holy_queen_enthroned_above.php

Hail holy queen enthroned above,
Oh Maria.
Hail mother of mercy and of love,
Oh Maria.
Triumph all ye cherubim,
Sing with us ye seraphim.
Heaven and earth resound the hymn.
Salve, salve, salve regina. :| 
Our life, our sweetness here below,
Oh, oh, oh, oh Maria.
Our hope in sorrow and in woe;
Oh, oh, oh, Maria.
Triumph all ye cherubim cherubim
Sing with us ye seraphim seraphim
Heaven and earth resound the hymn
Salve, salve, salve regina. 

Al le lu ia 

Mater, o mater intemerata,
Sanctus, sanctus, Dominus!
Virgo, respice; mater, adspice;
Sanctus, sanctus, Dominus! 

Al le lu ia 

Our life, our sweetness here below,
Oh, oh, oh, oh Maria
Our hope in sorrow and in woe;
Oh, oh, oh, Maria
Triumph all ye cherubim cherubim
Sing with us ye seraphim seraphim
Heaven and earth resound the hymn
Salve, salve, salve regina
salve regina, salve regi na. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_mighty_victor.php

Hail, mighty Victor! Behold He comes from out the grave.
Shout, shout His triumph! Oh, tell abroad His power to save.
Sing, sing with gladness, proclaim the news o’er land and sea:
He reigns forever, great Ruler over all is He.

Shout His praise, for us He came to die.
But lo, He lives!
He reigns upon His Father’s throne on high.

Glory, laud, and honor unto Christ the Lord be given.
Praise Him! all ye people, mighty Ruler of earth and Heav’n.
Praise Him! all ye stars of night.
Praise Him! all ye shining hosts of light.
Oh! that men would bless and praise His holy Name,
Would praise His holy Name.

[Repeat last stanza]

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_my_ever_blessed_jesus.php

Hail! my ever blessèd Jesus,
Only Thee I wish to sing;
To my soul Thy Name is precious,
Thou my Prophet, Priest and King.

O what mercy flows from Heaven!
O what joy and happiness!
Love I much? I’m much forgiven
I’m a miracle of grace.

Once with Adam’s race in ruin,
Unconcerned in sin I lay;
Swift destruction still pursuing,
Till my Savior passed that way.

Witness, all ye hosts of Heaven,
My Redeemer’s tenderness;
Love I much? I’m much forgiven,
I’m a miracle of grace.

Shout, ye bright angelic choir,
Praise the Lamb enthroned above;
Whilst astonished I admire
God’s free grace and boundless love.

That blest moment I received Him,
Filled my soul with joy and peace;
Love I much? I’m much forgiven,
I’m a miracle of grace.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_o_mary_full_of_grace.php

'Hail, O Mary, full of grace,
Daughter true of David's race!
Thou, of women first and best,
Art beyond all others blest.

Fear not, thou shalt bear a Son,
Aided by the Holy One;
Greater than the greatest, he
Son of God most high shall be.'

Thus the holy angel said.
Blessed Mary bowed her head:
'Lo, the handmaid of the Lord;
With his word may all accord.'

So to hearts still undefiled
Comes the promise of a child,
Full of joy, akin to tears,
Full of hope, yet full of fears.

Happy she who answers still,
'Be it, Lord, at thy sweet will;
All I am to thee I owe,
All thy purpose thou dost know.

What thou givest to be mine,
May it ne'er be aught but thine;
Be it good or be it ill,
Still be all at thy sweet will.'

Holy Mary, taught by thee
Let us vain forebodings flee.
God is giving; fears must cease:
In his will is perfect peace.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_princes_of_the_hosts_of_heaven.php

Hail! princes of the host of heaven,
To whom by Christ your Chief 'tis given
On shining thrones to sit on high,
And judge the world with equity.

Through you was borne the Gospel light
To those who lay in sin's dark night;
That Christ, the Life, the Truth, the Way,
Might lead them to eternal day.

Not in the power of earthly sword
Or arts of speech ye preached the Lord:
The Cross, the Cross which men despise,
'Twas this achieved your victories.

And now to God, the Three in One,
Be highest praise and glory done,
Who calls us from the gloom of night
To share the glory of his light.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_the_blest_morn.php

1. Hail The Blest Morn! When The Great Mediator
Down from the regions of glory descends;
Shepherds! Go worship the Lord in the manger,
Lo! For His guards the bright angels attend.

Chorus:

Brightest and best of the sons of the morning,
Dawn on our darkness and lend us thine aid.
Star in the east! The horizon adorning,
Guide where the infant Redeemer is laid.

2. Lo! On His cradle the dew-drops are shining,
Low lies His head with the beasts of the stall;
Angels adore Him with slumbers reclining,
Maker, Redeemer, and Savior of all.

3. Say, shall we yield Him some costly devotion,
Odors of Eden, and off'rings divine?
Gems from the mountain, and pearls from the ocean,
Myrrh from the forest, and gold from the mine?

4. Vainly we offer each ample oblation
Vainly with gold would His favor secure;
Richer by far is the heart's adoration,
Dearer to God are the prayers of the poor.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_the_day_that_sees_him_rise.php

Hail the day that sees Him rise, Alleluia!
To His throne above the skies, Alleluia!
Christ, awhile to mortals given, Alleluia!
Reascends His native heaven, Alleluia!

There the glorious triumph waits, Alleluia!
Lift your heads, eternal gates, Alleluia!
Christ hath conquered death and sin, Alleluia!
Take the King of glory in, Alleluia!

Circled round with angel powers, Alleluia!
Their triumphant Lord, and ours, Alleluia!
Conqueror over death and sin, Alleluia!
“Take the King of glory in! Alleluia!"

Him though highest Heav’n receives, Alleluia!
Still He loves the earth He leaves, Alleluia!
Though returning to His throne, Alleluia!
Still He calls mankind His own, Alleluia!

See! He lifts His hands above, Alleluia!
See! He shows the prints of love, Alleluia!
Hark! His gracious lips bestow, Alleluia!
Blessings on His church below, Alleluia!

Still for us His death He pleads, Alleluia!
Prevalent He intercedes, Alleluia!
Near Himself prepares our place, Alleluia!
Harbinger of human race, Alleluia!

Master, (will we ever say), Alleluia!
Taken from our head to day, Alleluia!
See Thy faithful servants, see, Alleluia!
Ever gazing up to Thee, Alleluia!

Grant, though parted from our sight, Alleluia!
Far above yon azure height, Alleluia!
Grant our hearts may thither rise, Alleluia!
Seeking Thee beyond the skies, Alleluia!

Ever upward let us move, Alleluia!
Wafted on the wings of love, Alleluia!
Looking when our Lord shall come, Alleluia!
Longing, gasping after home, Alleluia!

There we shall with Thee remain, Alleluia!
Partners of Thy endless reign, Alleluia!
There Thy face unclouded see, Alleluia!
Find our heaven of heavens in Thee, Alleluia!
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_the_glorious_golden_city.php

Hail the glorious golden city,
Pictured by the seers of old!
Everlasting light shines o’er it,
Wondrous tales of it are told:
Only righteous men and women
Dwell within its gleaming wall;
Wrong is banished from its borders,
Justice reigns supreme o’er all.

We are builders of that city,
All our joys and all our groans
Help to rear its shining ramparts;
All our lives are building stones:
Whether humble or exalted,
All are called to task divine;
All must aid alike to carry
Forward one sublime design.

And the work that we have builded,
Oft with bleeding hands and tears,
Oft in error, oft in anguish,
Will not perish with our years:
It will live and shine transfigured,
In the final reign of right;
It will pass into the splendors
Of the city of the light.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_the_sign.php

Hail the sign, the sign of Jesus,
bright and royal tree!
Standard of the Monarch, planted
first on Calvary!

Refrain:
Hail the sign all signs excelling,
hail the sign all ills dispelling,
hail the sign hell's power quelling,
Cross of Christ, all hail!

Sign the martyrs' strength and refuge,
sign to saints so dear!
Sign of evil men abhorrèd,
sign which devils fear: Refrain

Sign which, when the Lord returneth,
in the heavens shall be;
sinners quail, while saints with rapture
shall the vision see: Refrain

Lo, I sign the cross of Jesus
meekly on my breast;
may it guard my heart when living,
dying be its rest: Refrain

In the name of God the Father, 
Name of God the Son,
Name of God the blessèd Spirit,
Ever Three in One: Refrain
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_thee_festival_day.php

EASTER

Refrain

Hail thee, festival day!
Blessed day to be hallowed forever;
Day when our Lord was raised,
Breaking the kingdom of death.

Lo, the fair beauty of the earth,
From the death of the winter arising!
Every good gift of the year
Now with its Master returns.

Refrain

Rise from the grave now, O Lord,
The author of life and creation.
Treading the pathway of death,
New life You give to us all.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------

ASCENSION

Refrain

Hail thee, festival day!
Blessed day to be hallowed forever;
Day when our risen Lord
Rose in the heavens to reign.

He who was nailed to the cross
Is Ruler and Lord of all people.
All things created on earth
Sing to the glory of God.

Refrain

Daily the loveliness grows,
Adorned with glory of blossom;
Heaven her gates unbars,
Flinging her increase of light.

Refrain


------------------------------------------------------------------------------

PENTECOST

Refrain

Hail thee, festival day!
Blessed day to be hallowed forever;
Day when the Holy Ghost
Shone in the world full of grace.

Bright and in the likeness of fire,
On those who await your appearing,
You Whom the Lord had foretold
Suddenly, swiftly descend.

Refrain

Forth from the Father You come
With sevenfold mystical offering,
Pouring on all human souls
Infinite riches of God.

Refrain


------------------------------------------------------------------------------

ALL OCCASIONS

God the Almighty Lord,
The Ruler of earth and the heavens,
Guard us from harm without;
Cleanse us from evil within.

Jesus the health of the world,
Enlighten our minds, great Redeemer,
Son of the Father supreme,
Only begotten of God.

Spirit of life and of power,
Now flow in us, fount of our being,
Light that enlightens us all,
Life that in all may abide.

Praise to the giver of good!
O lover and author of concord,
Pour out your balm on our days;
Order our ways in your peace.


 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_this_blessed_easter.php

Now the earth, in joy awaking
From the sleep of winter drear,
Tells the story of His glory;
How He rose the Lord so dear.

Ev'ry soul sing alleluia;
Ev'ry heart be light and gay.
Alleluia, alleluia,
Hail this blessed Easter Day!

Children, come! With sweet rejoicing
Bless the Day our Lord arose;
While we're living ever giving
Praise to Christ who heals our woes.

Ev'ry soul sing alleluia;
Ev'ry heart be light and gay.
Alleluia, alleluia,
Hail this blessed Easter Day!
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_this_joyful_days_return.php

Hail this joyful day's return,
hail the Pentecostal morn,
morn when our ascended Lord
on his Church his Spirit poured! Alleluia!

Like to clove tongues of flame
on the twelve the Spirit came--
tongues, that earth may hear their call,
fire, that love may burn in all. Alleluia!

Lord, to you your people bend;
unto us your Spirit send;
blessings of this sacred day
grant us, dearest Lord, we pray. Alleluia!

You who did our forebears guide,
with their children still abide;
grant us pardon, grant us peace,
till our earthly wanderings cease. Alleluia!

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_to_the_brightness_of_zions_glad_morning.php

Hail to the brightness of Zion’s glad morning!
Joy to the lands that in darkness have lain!
Hushed be the accents of sorrow and mourning;
Zion in triumph begins her mild reign.

Hail to the brightness of Zion’s glad morning!
Long by the prophets of Israel foretold!
Hail to the millions from bondage returning!
Gentiles and Jews the blest vision behold.

Lo, in the desert rich flowers are springing,
Streams ever copious are gliding along;
Loud from the mountain tops echoes are ringing,
Wastes rise in verdure, and mingle in song.

See, from all lands, from the isles of the ocean,
Praise to the Savior ascending on high;
Fallen the engines of war and commotion;
Shouts of salvation are rending the sky.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_to_the_lord_who_comes.php

Hail to the Lord Who comes,
Comes to His temple gate;
Not with His angel host,
Not in His kingly state;
No shouts proclaim Him nigh,
No crowds His coming wait.

But, borne upon the throne
Of Mary’s gentle breast,
Watched by her duteous love,
In her fond arms at rest,
Thus to His Father’s house
He comes, the heav’nly Guest.

There Joseph at her side
In reverent wonder stands,
And, filled with holy joy,
Old Simeon in his hands
Takes up the promised Child,
The Glory of all lands.

Hail to the great First-born
Whose ransom price they pay!
The Son before all worlds,
The Child of man today,
That He might ransom us
Who still in bondage lay.

O Light of all the earth,
Thy children wait for Thee!
Come to Thy temples here,
That we, from sin set free,
Before Thy Father’s face
May all presented be!
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_to_the_lords_anointed.php

Hail to the Lord’s anointed, great David’s greater Son!
Hail in the time appointed, His reign on earth begun!
He comes to break oppression, to set the captive free;
To take away transgression and rule in equity.

He comes in succor speedy to those who suffer wrong;
To help the poor and needy, and bid the weak be strong;
To give them songs for sighing, their darkness turn to light,
Whose souls, condemned and dying, were precious in His sight.

By such shall He be fearèd while sun and moon endure;
Beloved, obeyed, reverèd; for He shall judge the poor
Through changing generations, with justice, mercy, truth,
While stars maintain their stations, or moons renew their youth.

He shall come down like showers upon the fruitful earth;
Love, joy, and hope, like flowers, spring in His path to birth.
Before Him, on the mountains, shall peace, the herald, go,
And righteousness, in fountains, from hill to valley flow.

Arabia’s desert ranger to Him shall bow the knee;
The Ethiopian stranger His glory come to see;
With offerings of devotion ships from the isles shall meet,
To pour the wealth of oceans in tribute at His feet.

Kings shall fall down before Him, and gold and incense bring;
All nations shall adore Him, His praise all people sing;
For He shall have dominion o’er river, sea and shore,
Far as the eagle’s pinion or dove’s light wing can soar.

For Him shall prayer unceasing and daily vows ascend;
His kingdom still increasing, a kingdom without end:
The mountain dews shall nourish a seed in weakness sown,
Whose fruit shall spread and flourish and shake like Lebanon.

O’er every foe victorious, He on His throne shall rest;
From age to age more glorious, all blessing and all blest.
The tide of time shall never His covenant remove;
His Name shall stand forever, His Name to us is Love.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_to_the_prince_of_life_and_peace.php

Hail to the Prince of life and peace,
Who holds the keys of death and hell!
The spacious world unseen is His,
And sovereign power becomes Him well.

In shame and torment once He died,
But now He lives forevermore;
Bow down, ye saints, around His seat,
And all ye angel bands, adore.

So live forever, glorious Lord,
To crush Thy foes and guard Thy friends!
While all Thy chosen tribes rejoice
That Thy dominion never ends.

Worthy Thy hands to hold the keys,
Guided by wisdom and by love;
Worthy to rule o’er mortal life,
O’er worlds below and worlds above.

Forever reign, victorious King!
Wide through the earth Thy Name is known;
And call my longing soul to sing
Sublimer anthems near Thy throne.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_to_the_sabbath_day.php

Hail to the Sabbath day!
The day divinely given,
When men to God their homage pay,
And earth draws near to Heaven.

Lord, in this sacred hour,
Within Thy courts we bend,
And bless Thy love, and own Thy power,
Our Father and our Friend.

But Thou art not alone
In courts by mortals trod;
Nor only is the day Thine own
When man draws near to God.

Thy temple is the arch
Of yon unmeasured sky;
Thy Sabbath, the stupendous march
Of vast eternity.

Lord, may that holier day
Dawn on Thy servants’ sight;
And purer worship may we pay
In Heaven’s unclouded light.

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_virgin_dearest_mary.php

Hail, Virgin, dearest Mary!

Our lovely Queen of May,
O spotless blessed Lady,
Our lovely Queen of May.

Thy children humbly bending,
A round thy shrine so dear;
With heart and voice ascending,
Sweet Mary hear our prayer.

Hail, Virgin, dearest Mary!
Our lovely Queen of May,
O spotless blessed Lady,
Our lovely Queen of May.

Behold earth's blossoms springing,
In beauteous form and hue;
All nature gladly bringing,
Her sweetest charms to you.

Hail, Virgin, dearest Mary!
Our lovely Queen of May,
O spotless blessed Lady,
Our lovely Queen of May.

We'll gather fresh, bright flowers,
To bind our fair Queen's brow;
From gay and verdant bowers,
We haste to crown the now.

Hail, Virgin, dearest Mary!
Our lovely Queen of May,
O spotless blessed Lady,
Our lovely Queen of May.

And now our blesed Mother,
Smile on our festal day;
Accept our wreath of flowers,
And be our Queen of May.

Hail, Virgin, dearest Mary!
Our lovely Queen of May,
O spotless blessed Lady,
Our lovely Queen of May.

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_ye_followers_of_the_lamb.php

1. Hail! Ye Foll'wers of the Lamb 
Ye who love the Savior's name,
Who are cleansed by pard'ning blood,
Go with us, the way is good.

2. Glories bright we have in view,
While we on our way pursue;
March with joy the heav'nly road,
Go with us, the way is good.

3. Doubting souls, dismiss your fears,
Mourning souls, dry up your tears;
Christ for you has spilt His blood,
Go with is, the way is good.

4. Burdened souls, oppressed with grief,
Jesus freely grants relief;
He'll remove your heavy load,
Go with us, the way is good.

5. Ye who know your Savior's love,
Now your faithfulness approve;
Follow Him in Jordan's flood,
Go with us, the way is good.

6. Saints, begin the heav'nly song,
Join in concert, every tongue;
Walk with joy the heav'nly road,
Go with is, the way is good.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_ye_sighing_sons_of_sorrow.php

Hail, ye sighing sons of sorrow,
View with me th'autumnal gloom,
Learn from thence your fate to-morrow;
Dead perhaps, laid in the tomb.
See all nature fading, dying,
Silent, all things seem to mourn,
Life from vegetation flying,
Brings to mind the mould'ring urn.

Oft when autumn's tempest rising,a Makes the lofty forest nod,
Scenes of nature how surprising,
Read in nature nature's God.
See the sov'reign, sole Creator,
Lives eternal in the skies,
Whilst we mortals yield to nature,
Bloom awhile, then fade and die.

Lo! I hear the air resounding,
With expiring insects' cries;
Ah! their moans to me how wounding,
Emblems of my age and sighs,
Hollow winds about me roaring,
Noisy waters round me rise,
Whilst I sit my fate deploring,
Tears fast streaming from my eyes.

What to me is autumn's treasure,
Since I know no earthly joy?
Long I've lost all youthful pleasure,
Time must youth and health destroy.
Pleasures once I fondly courted,
Shared each bliss that health bestows,
But to see where then I sported,
Now embitters all my woes.

Age and sorrow since have blasted
Ev'ry youthful, pleasing dream;
Quiv'ring age with youth contrasted,
O, how short their glories seem!
As the annual frosts are cropping
Leaves and tendrils from the trees,
So my friends are yearly dropping,
Through old age and dire disease.

Former friends, O, how I've sought them!
Just to cheer my drooping mind;
But they're gone like leaves in autumn,
Driv'n before a dreary wind.
Sping and summer, fall and winter,
Each in swift succession roll,
So my friends in death do enter,
Bringing sadness to my soul.

Death has laid them down to slumber;
Solemn thought to think that I
Soon must be one of that number!
Soon--ah, soon, with them lie!
When a few more years are wasted,
When a few more scenes are o'er,
When a few more griefs are tasted,
I shall fall to rise no more.

Fast sun of life declining,
Soon will set in endless night;
But my hope, pure and refining,
Rests in future life and light.
Cease this fearing, trembling, sighing,
Death will break the sudden gloom;
Soon my spirit, flutt'ring, flying,
Must be borne beyond the tomb.

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_sacred_day_of_earthly_rest.php

Hail! sacred day of earthly rest,
From toil and trouble free:
Hail! day of light, that bringest light
And joy to me.

A holy stillness, breathing calm
On all the world around,
Uplifts my soul, O God, to Thee,
Where rest is found.

On all I think, or say, or do,
A ray of light divine
Is shed, O God, this day by Thee,
For it is Thine.

No sound of jarring strife is heard,
As weekly labors cease;
No voice, but those that sweetly sing
Sweet songs of peace.

For those who sings with saints below
Glad songs of heavenly love,
Shall sing—when songs on earth have ceased—
With saints above.

Accept, O God, my hymn of praise,
That Thou, this day, hast given
Sweet foretaste of that endless day
Of rest in Heaven.


 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_body_true.php

Hail, Body true, of Mary born, and in the manger laid,
That once with thorn and scourging torn wast on the cross displayed,
That every eye might there descry th’uplifted Sacrifice,
Which once for all to God on high paid our redemption’s price!

Hail, precious Blood, by true descent drawn from our own first sire,
Yet innocent of that fell taint which fills our veins with fire,
Once from the side of Him that died for love of us His kin,
Drained an atonement to provide and wash away our sin!

Still Thou art here amidst us, Lord, unchangeably the same;
When at Thy board with one accord Thy promises we claim;
But lo! the way Thou com’st today is one where bread and wine
Conceal the Presence they convey, both human and divine.

How glorious is that Body now, throned on the Throne of Heav’n!
The angels bow, and marvel how to us on earth ’tis given;
Oh, to discern what splendors burn within these veils of His—
That faith could into vision turn, and see Him as He is!

How mighty is the Blood that ran for sinful nature’s needs!
It broke the ban, it rescued man; it lives, and speaks, and pleads;
And all who sup from this blest Cup in faith and hope and love,
Shall prove that death is swallowed up in richer life above.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_happy_morning.php

Hail happy morning, hail, holy day,
Calling from earthly labors away,
Sweet words of wisdom, glad songs of joy,
Now be our best employ.

Refrain

Sing once more the happy, happy song,
While the golden moments roll along,
“Come to the temple, come, come away,
Hallow the Sabbath day."

Emblem of heaven, sweet day of rest,
In thy “remembrance," may we be blessed.
So may our songs and lives ever say,
“Hallow the Sabbath day."

Refrain

Rest from our labors, rest from our cares,
Rest in our praises, rest in our prayers,
So the commandment would we obey,
“Hallow the Sabbath day."

Refrain
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_holy_light_the_world_rejoices.php

Hail, holy Light! The world rejoices
As morning breaks and shadows fly;
All nature blends her myriad voices
To greet the dayspring from on high,
To greet the dayspring from on high.

Break forth, in glory far excelling,
O Light eternal, Love divine!
Let Thy bright beams, all shades dispelling,
Around us and within us shine,
Around us and within us shine.

The heav’nly hosts fall down before Thee,
And “Holy!" cry, nor ever rest;
The saints on earth, with them, adore Thee,
Creator, Savior, Spirit blest,
Creator, Savior, Spirit blest.

O God, if we could duly praise Thee,
Could we but voice the love we see,
As sweet as song as angels raise Thee,
Our Sabbath morning hymn should be,
Our Sabbath morning hymn should be.

Accept, O Father, we entreat Thee,
The worship which Thy children bring;
O, grant us grace in Heav’n to greet Thee,
And with all saints Thy love to sing,
And with all saints Thy love to sing.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_o_star_that_pointest.php

Hail, O star that pointest
Towards the port of Heaven,
Thou to whom as maiden
God for Son was given.

When the salutation
Gabriel had spoken,
Peace was shed upon us,
Eva’s bonds were broken.

Bound by Satan’s fetters,
Health and vision needing,
God will aid and light us
At thy gentle pleading.

Jesu’s tender mother,
Make thy supplication
Unto Him Who chose thee
At His incarnation;

That, O matchless maiden,
Passing meek and lowly,
Thy dear Son may make us
Blameless, chaste and holy.

So, as now we journey
Aid our weak endeavor,
Till we gaze on Jesus,
And rejoice forever.

Father, Son and Spirit,
Three in One confessing,
Give we equal glory,
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_sovereign_love.php

Hail, sovereign love that first began,
The scheme to rescue fallen man;
Hail matchless free eternal grace,
That gave my soul a hiding place.

Against the God who rules the sky,
I fought with hand uplifted high,
Despised the mention of His grace,
Too proud to seek a hiding place.

Enwrapped in thick Egyptian night,
And fond of darkness more than light,
Madly I ran the sinful race,
Secure without a hiding place.

But thus th’ eternal counsel ran,
“Almighty Love, arrest that man!"
I felt the arrows of distress,
And found I had no hiding place.

Indignant justice stood in view,
To Sinai’s fiery mount I flew,
But Justice cried with frowning face,
“This mountain is no hiding place!"

Ere long a heavenly voice I heard,
And Mercy’s angel form appeared.
Who led me on with gentle pace,
To Jesus Christ, my hiding place.

On Him Almighty vengeance fell,
That must have sunk a world to hell;
He bore it for a chosen race,
And thus became their hiding place.

Should storms of sevenfold vengeance roll,
And shake this earth from pole to pole;
No flaming bolt could daunt my face,
For Jesus is my hiding place.

A few more rolling suns at most,
Shall land me safe on Heaven’s coast.
There I shall sing the song of grace,
To Jesus Christ, my hiding place!

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_thou_bright_and_sacred_morn.php

Hail, thou bright and sacred morn,
Ris’n with gladness in thy beams!
Light, which not of earth is born,
From thy dawn in glory streams;
Airs of Heav’n are breathed around,
And each place is holy ground.

Sad and weary were our way,
Fainting oft beneath our load,
But for thee, thou blessèd day,
Resting place on life’s rough road;
Here flow forth the streams of grace;
Strengthened hence we run our race.

Great Creator, Who this day
From Thy perfect work didst rest,
By the souls that own Thy sway
Hallowed be its hours and blest;
Cares of earth aside be thrown,
This day give to Heav’n alone.

Savior, Who this day didst break
The dark prison of the tomb,
Bid my slumbering soul awake;
Shine through all its sin and gloom;
Let me, from my bonds set free,
Rise from sin, and live to Thee.

Blessèd Spirit, Comforter,
Sent this day from Christ on high;
Lord, on me Thy gifts confer,
Cleanse, illumine, sanctify:
All Thine influence shed abroad;
Let me to the truth of God.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_thou_once_despised_jesus.php

Hail, Thou once despisèd Jesus! Hail, Thou Galilean King!
Thou didst suffer to release us; Thou didst free salvation bring.
Hail, Thou universal Savior, Who hast borne our sin and shame!
By Thy merits we find favor; life is given through Thy Name.

Paschal Lamb, by God appointed, all our sins on Thee were laid;
By almighty love anointed, Thou hast full atonement made.
Every sin may be forgiven through the virtue of Thy blood;
Opened is the gate of heaven, reconciled are we with God.

Jesus, hail! enthroned in glory, there forever to abide;
All the heavenly hosts adore Thee, seated at Thy Father’s side.
There for sinners Thou art pleading; there Thou dost our place prepare;
Thou for saints art interceding till in glory they appear.

Worship, honor, power and blessing Christ is worthy to receive;
Loudest praises, without ceasing, right it is for us to give.
Help, ye bright angelic spirits, bring your sweetest, noblest lays;
Help to sing of Jesus’ merits, help to chant Emmanuel’s praise!
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_thou_source_of_every_blessing.php

Hail, Thou Source of every blessing,
Sovereign Father of mankind!
Gentiles now, Thy grace possessing,
In Thy courts admission find.
Grateful now we fall before Thee,
In Thy Church obtain a place,
Now by faith behold Thy glory,
Praise Thy truth, adore Thy grace.

Once far off, but now invited,
We approach Thy sacred throne;
In Thy covenant united,
Reconciled, redeemed, made one.
Now revealed to Eastern sages,
See the Star of Mercy shine;
Mystery hid in former ages,
Mystery great of love divine.

Hail, Thou all-inviting Savior!
Gentiles now their offerings bring;
In Thy temple seek Thy favor,
Jesus Christ, our Lord and King.
May we, body, soul, and spirit,
Live devoted to Thy praise,
Glorious realms of bliss inherit,
Grateful anthems ever raise!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hail_sweetest_dearest_tie_that_binds.php

Hail! sweetest, dearest tie that binds
Our glowing hearts in one;
Hail sacred hope, that tunes our minds
To harmony divine.
It is the hope, the blissful hope,
Refrain

Which Jesus’ grace has giv’n;
The hope when days and years are passed,
We all shall meet in Heav’n.

What though the northern wintry blast
Shall howl around thy cot,
What though beneath an eastern sun,
Be cast our distant lot;
Yet still we share the blissful hope!

Refrain

No lingering hope, no parting sigh,
Our future meetings knows;
The friendship beams from every eye,
And hope immortal grows,
O sacred hope! O blissful hope!

Refrain
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/halleluia_jesus_is_lord.php

Hallelujah, Jesus is Lord
Hallelujah, death is no more
Hallelujah, hope is restored
Hallelujah, Jesus is Lord

1. He was dead in the grave
And all hope had vanished away
He arose; He’s alive
And I’m ready to shout it on high (chorus)

2. I was dead in my sins
Bound for hell and darkness within
By His love, I’m alive
Heaven’s gates are opened wide (chorus)

3. We’re alive in the Son
Longing for the day He will come
In a flash, trumpet blast
Christ the Victor will raise us at last !


Hallelujah, Jesus is Lord !!
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/halleluia_salvation.php

Halleluiah, halleluiah,
salvation and glory and power
Halleluiah, halleluiah,
blessing and honor belong to our God (repeat)

For the Lord, the Almighty reigns,
the Almighty reigns
For the Lord, the Almighty reigns,
forever and ever amen

Halleluiah, halleluiah,
salvation and glory and power
Halleluiah, halleluiah,
Blessing and honor belong to our God
Blessing and honor belong to our God,
Blessing and honor belong to our God

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hallelujah_chorus.php

|: Hallelujah! Hallelujah! Hallelujah!
Hallelujah! Hallelujah! :| 
|: For the Lord God Omnipotent reigneth.
Hallelujah! Hallelujah! Hallelujah! Hallelujah! :| 

For the Lord God omnipotent reigneth.
|: Hallelujah! Hallelujah! Hallelujah! Hallelujah!
Hallelujah! Hallelujah! Hallelujah! :| 

The kingdom of this world
Is become the kingdom of our Lord,
And of His Christ, and of His Christ;
And He shall reign for ever and ever,
For ever and ever, forever and ever, 

King of kings, and Lord of lords,
|: King of kings, and Lord of lords, :|
And Lord of lords,
And He shall reign,
And He shall reign forever and ever,
King of kings, forever and ever,
And Lord of lords,
Hallelujah! Hallelujah! 

And He shall reign forever and ever,
|: King of kings! and Lord of lords! :|
And He shall reign forever and ever,
King of kings! and Lord of lords!
Hallelujah! Hallelujah! Hallelujah! Hallelujah!
Hallelujah! 
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hallelujah_christ_is_risen.php

Hallelujah! hallelujah!
Heart and voice to Heaven raise,
Sing to God a hymn of gladness,
Sing to God a hymn of praise;
He Who on the cross a ransom
For the world’s salvation bled,
Jesus Christ the King of glory
Now is risen from the dead.

Christ is risen, Christ the firstfruits
Of the holy harvest field,
Which will all its full abundance,
At His glorious advent, yield;
Then the golden ears of harvest
Will before His presence wave,
Rising in His sunshine joyous,
From the furrow of the grave.

Hallelujah! hallelujah!
Glory be to God above!
Hallelujah, to the Savior,
Fount of life and source of love;
Hallelujah, to the Spirit
Let our high ascriptions be;
Hallelujah, now and ever,
To the blessèd Trinity.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hallelujah_for_the_cross.php



The cross, it standeth fast—
Hallelujah, hallelujah!
Defying every blast—
Hallelujah, hallelujah!
The winds of hell have blown,
The world its hate hath shown,
Yet it is not overthrown—
Hallelujah for the cross!

Refrain

Hallelujah, hallelujah,
Hallelujah for the cross;
Hallelujah, hallelujah,
It shall never suffer loss!

It is the old cross still—
Hallelujah, hallelujah!
Its triumph let us tell—
Hallelujah, hallelujah!
The grace of God here shone
Thru Christ, the blessèd Son,
Who did for sin atone—
Hallelujah for the cross!

Refrain

’Twas here the debt was paid—
Hallelujah, hallelujah!
Our sins on Jesus laid—
Hallelujah, hallelujah!
So round the cross we sing
Of Christ, our offering,
Of Christ, our living King—
Hallelujah for the cross!

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hallelujah_jesus_saves_me.php



Long mine eyes were drowned in tears,
And my soul was filled with fears,
And I heeded not the swiftly passing years;
For thro’ many a weary day,
O’er a long and desert way
From the fold of Christ, my Shepherd, I did stray.
Refrain

Hallelujah! Jesus saves me,
And my head is sweetly pillowed on His breast;
Hallelujah, hallelujah!
His shekinah covers me and I am blest.

Now I doubt and fear no more,
All my heart with bliss runs o’er,
And I can but love Him, praise Him and adore;
Skies above me never lower,
Bright is every fleeting hour,
And I sing the day of Jesus’ mighty power.

Refrain

O how precious is His grace!
O to come to that fair place
Where our souls may drink the light of His dear face!
There before His shining seat
All his sainted ones shall meet,
Casting down their crowns before His piercèd feet.

Refrain

Will you join us, brother dear,
While His voice of love and cheer
Now is calling you—O hasten to His side;
Every day you wait is lost,
Sad will be the fearful cost,
If you blindly spurn at last the Crucified.

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hallelujah_unto_jesus.php



Hallelujah unto Jesus!
Now He lives to die no more;
Let all nations sing His praises,
Gladly sing them o’er and o’er.

Refrain

Hallelujah! Hallelujah!
Hallelujah! to our King!
From the tomb today He’s risen,
Hallelujah we’ll sing.

Hallelujah unto Jesus!
Who for us once bled, and died,
He is now o’er death, the Victor,
Hail Him King the Crucified.

Refrain

Hallelujah unto Jesus!
Blessèd firstfruits of the dead;
He our resurrection Surety,
Lives for us our risen King.

Refrain

Hallelujah unto Jesus!
Death is robbed now of its sting;
And the tomb for us lighted,
Hallelujah to our King.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hallelujah.php

I now have the Spirit that setteth me free,
Hallelujah!
My Savior’s own presence abideth with me,
Hallelujah!

Refrain

Oh, hallelujah! hallelujah!
I am glad to tell,
Oh, hallelujah! hallelujah!
With my soul ’tis well.

No longer I’m doubting His power to save,
Hallelujah!
The pleasures of earth I no longer now crave,
Hallelujah!

Refrain

So glad I can trust Him I cannot but shout,
Hallelujah!
The inbred corruption is all taken out,
Hallelujah!

Refrain

My Savior is with me each day in the year,
Hallelujah!
A constant Companion, I’ve nothing to fear,
Hallelujah!

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hallelujah_christ_is_risen.php

Hallelujah! hallelujah!
Heart and voice to Heaven raise,
Sing to God a hymn of gladness,
Sing to God a hymn of praise;
He Who on the cross a ransom
For the world’s salvation bled,
Jesus Christ the King of glory
Now is risen from the dead.

Christ is risen, Christ the firstfruits
Of the holy harvest field,
Which will all its full abundance,
At His glorious advent, yield;
Then the golden ears of harvest
Will before His presence wave,
Rising in His sunshine joyous,
From the furrow of the grave.

Hallelujah! hallelujah!
Glory be to God above!
Hallelujah, to the Savior,
Fount of life and source of love;
Hallelujah, to the Spirit
Let our high ascriptions be;
Hallelujah, now and ever,
To the blessèd Trinity.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hallelujah_jesus_lives.php

Hallelujah! Jesus lives!
He is now the Living One;
From the gloomy halls of death
Christ, the conqueror, has gone,
Bright forerunner to the skies
Of His people, yet to rise.

Jesus lives! Why do you weep?
Why that sad and mournful sigh?
He who died our Brother here
Lives our Brother still on high.
Lives forever to bestow
Blessings on His church below.

Jesus lives! And thus, my soul,
Life eternal waits for you;
Joined to Him, your living head,
Where He is, you shall be, too;
With the Lord, at His right hand,
As a victor you shall stand.

Jesus lives! Let all rejoice.
Praise Him, ransomed of the earth.
Praise Him in a nobler song,
Cherubim of heavenly birth.
Praise the victor King, Whose sway
Sin and death and hell obey.

Jesus lives! To Him my heart
Draws with ever new delight.
Earthly vanities, depart,
Hinder not my heavenward flight.
Let this spirit ever rise
To its Magnet in the skies.

Hallelujah! Angels, sing!
Join with us in hymns of praise.
Let your chorus swell the strain
Which our feebler voices raise;
Glory to our God above
And on earth His peace and love!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hallelujah_let_praises_ring.php

Hallelujah! Let praises ring!
To God the Father let us bring
Our songs of adoration.
To Him through everlasting days
Be worship, honor, power and praise,
Whose hand sustains creation.
Singing, ringing: Holy, holy, God is holy,
Spread the story of our God, the Lord of Glory.

Hallelujah! Let praises ring!
Unto the Lamb of God we sing,
In Whom we are elected.
He bought His Church with His own blood,
He cleansed her in that blessèd flood,
And as His bride selected.
Holy, holy is our union and communion,
His befriending gives us joy and peace unending.

Hallelujah! Let praises ring!
Unto the Holy Ghost we sing
For our regeneration.
The saving faith in us He wrought
And us unto the Bridegroom brought,
Made us His chosen nation.
Glory! Glory! Joy eternal, bliss supernal;
There is manna and an endless, glad hosanna.

Hallelujah! Let praises ring!
Unto our Triune God we sing;
Blest be His Name forever!
With angel hosts let us adore
And sing His praises more and more
For all His grace and favor!
Singing, ringing: Holy, holy, God is holy,
Spread the story of our God, the Lord of Glory!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hallelujah_praise_jehovah_1.php

Hallelujah, praise Jehovah,
O my soul, Jehovah praise;
I will sing the glorious praises
Of my God through all my days.
Put no confidence in princes,
Nor for help on man depend;
He shall die, to dust returning,
And his purposes shall end.

Happy is the man that chooses
Israel’s God to be his aid;
He is blest whose hope of blessing
On the Lord his God is stayed.
Heaven and earth the Lord created,
Seas and all that they contain;
He delivers from oppression,
Righteousness He will maintain.

Food He daily gives the hungry,
Sets the mourning prisoner free,
Raises those bowed down with anguish,
Makes the sightless eyes to see.
Well Jehovah loves the righteous,
And the stranger He befriends,
Helps the fatherless and the widow,
Judgment on the wicked sends.

Hallelujah, praise Jehovah,
O my soul, Jehovah praise;
I will sing the glorious praises
Of my God through all my days.
Over all God reigns forever,
Through all ages He is King;
Unto Him, thy God, O Zion,
Joyful hallelujahs sing.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hallelujah_praise_jehovah_kirkpatrick.php

Hallelujah, praise Jehovah, from the heavens praise His Name;
Praise Jehovah in the highest, all His angels, praise proclaim.
All His hosts, together praise Him, sun and moon and stars on high;
Praise Him, O you heav’ns of heavens, and you floods above the sky.

Refrain

Let them praises give Jehovah, for His Name alone is high,
And His glory is exalted, and His glory is exalted,
And His glory is exalted far above the earth and sky.

Let them praises give Jehovah, they were made at His command;
Them forever He established, His decree shall ever stand,
From the earth, O praise Jehovah, all you seas, you monsters all,
Fire and hail and snow and vapors, stormy winds that hear His call.

Refrain

All you fruitful trees and cedars, all you hills and mountains high,
Creeping things and beasts and cattle, birds that in the heavens fly,
Kings of earth, and all you people, princes great, earth’s judges all;
Praise His Name, young men and maidens, agèd men, and children small.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hallelujah_raise_o_raise.php

Hallelujah! raise, O raise
To our God the song of praise;
All His servants join to sing
God our Savior and our King.

Blessèd be forevermore
That dread Name which we adore;
Round the world His praise be sung
Through all lands, in every tongue.

O’er all nations God alone,
Higher than the heav’ns His throne;
Who is like to God most high,
Infinite in majesty!

Yet to view the heav’ns He bends;
Yea, to earth He condescends;
Passing by the rich and great,
For the low and desolate.

He can raise the poor to stand
With the princes of the land;
Wealth upon the needy shower;
Set him with the high in power.

He the broken spirit cheers:
Turns to joy the mourner’s tears;
Such the wonders of His ways;
Praise His Name, forever praise!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hallelujah_he_is_risen.php

Hallelujah, He is risen!
Jesus is gone up on high!
Burst the bars of death asunder,
Angels shout and men reply:
He is risen, He is risen,
Living now no more to die.
He is risen, He is risen,
Living now no more to die.

Hallelujah, He is risen!
Our exalted Head to be;
Sends the witness of the Spirit
That our advocate is He:
He is risen, He is risen,
Justified in Him are we.
He is risen, He is risen,
Justified in Him are we.

Hallelujah, He is risen!
Death for aye hath lost his sting,
Christ, Himself the Resurrection,
From the grave His own will bring:
He is risen, He is risen,
Living Lord and coming King.
He is risen, He is risen,
Living Lord and coming King.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hallelujah_jesus_is_lord.php

Hallelujah, Jesus is Lord
Hallelujah, death is no more
Hallelujah, hope is restored
Hallelujah, Jesus is Lord

He was dead in the grave
And all hope had vanished away
He arose; He’s alive
And I’m ready to shout it on high.

Refrain

I was dead in my sins
Bound for hell and darkness within
By His love, I’m alive
Heaven’s gates are opened wide.

Refrain

We’re alive in the Son
Longing for the day He will come
In a flash, trumpet blast
Christ the Victor will raise us at last!

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hallelujah_tis_done.php

’Tis the promise of God, full salvation to give
Unto him who on Jesus, His Son, will believe.

Refrain

Hallelujah, ’tis done! I believe on the Son;
I am saved by the blood of the crucified One;
Hallelujah, ’tis done! I believe on the Son;
I am saved by the blood of the crucified One.

Though the pathway be lonely, and dangerous, too,
Surely Jesus is able to carry me through.

Refrain

Many loved ones have I in yon heavenly throng,
They are safe now in glory, and this is their song:

Refrain

Little children I see standing close by their King,
And He smiles as their song of salvation they sing:

Refrain

There are prophets and kings in that throng I behold,
And they sing as they march through the streets of pure gold:

Refrain

There’s a part in that chorus for you and for me,
And the theme of our praises forever will be:

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hallelujah_we_shall_rise.php

In the resurrection morning,
When the trump of God shall sound,
We shall rise, Hallelujah! we shall rise!
Then the saints will come rejoicing
And no tears will e’er be found,
We shall rise, Hallelujah! we shall rise.

Refrain

We shall rise, Hallelujah! we shall rise!
Amen! We shall rise! Hallelujah!
In the resurrection morning,
When death’s prison bars are broken,
We shall rise, Hallelujah! We shall rise.

In the resurrection morning,
What a meeting it will be,
We shall rise, Hallelujah! we shall rise!
When our fathers and our mothers,
And our loved ones we shall see,
We shall rise, Hallelujah! we shall rise!

Refrain

In the resurrection morning,
Blessèd thought it is to me,
We shall rise, Hallelujah! we shall rise!
I shall see my blessèd Savior,
Who so freely died for me,
We shall rise, Hallelujah! we shall rise!

Refrain

In the resurrection morning,
We shall meet Him in the air,
We shall rise, Hallelujah! we shall rise!
And be carried up to glory,
To our home so bright and fair,
We shall rise, Hallelujah! we shall rise!

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hallelujah_what_a_savoir.php

Man of Sorrows! what a name
For the Son of God, Who came
Ruined sinners to reclaim.
Hallelujah! What a Savior!

Bearing shame and scoffing rude,
In my place condemned He stood;
Sealed my pardon with His blood.
Hallelujah! What a Savior!

Guilty, vile, and helpless we;
Spotless Lamb of God was He;
“Full atonement!" can it be?
Hallelujah! What a Savior!

Lifted up was He to die;
“It is finished!" was His cry;
Now in Heav’n exalted high.
Hallelujah! What a Savior!

When He comes, our glorious King,
All His ransomed home to bring,
Then anew His song we’ll sing:
Hallelujah! What a Savior!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hallelujah_glory.php

Hallelujah, glory

Hallelujah, glory

Hallelujah, glory

Hallelujah, glory
To the Holy of Holies

To the Holy of Holies
Hallelujah, glory

Hallelujah, glory
Who was
And who is
And who is
To come

© 1995 Mercy/Vineyard Publishing
CCLI# 1596342
Album: Hallelujah, Glory/Vineyard

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hallelujah_shout_to_the_earth.php

Hallelujah, glory

Hallelujah, glory

Hallelujah, glory

Hallelujah, glory
To the Holy of Holies

To the Holy of Holies
Hallelujah, glory

Hallelujah, glory
Who was
And who is
And who is
To come

© 1995 Mercy/Vineyard Publishing
CCLI# 1596342
Album: Hallelujah, Glory/Vineyard

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hallelujah_thine_the_glory.php

My God, I have found the thrice-blessed ground,
Where life and where joy and true comfort abound.

Refrain:
Hallelujah! Thine the glory!
Hallelujah! Amen!
Hallelujah! Thine the glory!
Revive us again.

'Tis found in the blood of Him who once stood
My refuge and safety, my Surety with God.

He bore on the tree the sentence for me,
And now both the Surety and sinner are free.

Accepted I am in the onceoffered Lamb,
It was was God who Himself had devised the plan.

And though here below 'mid sorrow and woe,
My place is in heaven with Jesus, I know.

And this I shall find, for such is His mind.
He'll not be in glory and leave me behind. 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hallelujah_your_love_is_amazing.php

Your love is amazing, steady and unchanging
Your love is a mountain, firm beneath my feet
Your love is a mystery, how you gently lift me
When I am surrounded, your love carries me

Hallelujah, hallelujah
Hallelujah, your love makes me sing
Hallelujah, hallelujah
Hallelujah, your love makes me sing

Your love is surprising, I can feel it rising
All the joy that's growing deep inside of me
Every time I see you, all your goodness shines through
And I can feel this God song, rising up in me

© 2000 Vineyard Songs (UK/Eire)
CCLI# 1596342
Album: Come, Now is the Time to Worship
25 Top Vineyard Worship Songs

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hand_in_hand.php

Now begin the heavenly race—
The Savior calls today;
Let us early seek His face,
And early learn to pray.

Refrain

Hand in hand we’ll journey on,
Reaching forward to the prize,
Hoping, trusting in the Lord,
Where all our vigor lies.

He Who left His Father’s throne,
To suffer, bleed and die,
He Who made our grief his own,
Will every want supply.

Refrain

They who on His Name believe,
And patiently endure,
Life eternal shall receive,
And find His mercy sure.

Refrain

Now begin the heavenly race,
No more, no more delay;
To the healing fount of grace,
Rejoicing, haste away.

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/handle_with_care.php

Look out, little woman! Look out, little man!
Do be just as careful as ever you can,
For each of you carry a treasure too rare
To risk any trifling, so “Handle with care!" 

Refrain:
Look out! Look out, little woman!
Look out, little man! 

Your soul is the treasure, and day after day
You choose which to follow: the straight or broad way;
So mind what comes nigh you, and heed where you go—
Your soul is eternal for weal or for woe. 

The words of the Savior were “Come unto Me!"
So sweetly He spoke them in dear Galilee;
He wants us to serve Him with pure hearts, and true;
Then let us be careful in all that we do. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hands_that_have_been_handling.php

Hands that have been handling,
holy things and high,
still, Lord, in thy service
bless and fortify.

Ears which heard the message
of the words of life,
keep thou closed and guarded
from the noise of strife.

Eyes whose contemplation
looked upon thy love,
let them gaze expectant
on the world above.

"Holy, holy, holy,"
thee our lips confessed:
on those lips for ever
let no falsehood rest.

Feet which trod the pavement
round about God's board,
let them walk in glory
where God's light is poured.

Bodies that have tasted
of the living Bread,
be they re-created
in their living Head.

Be we all one Body,
all our members one,
measured by the stature
of God's full-grown Son.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/happiness_is.php

Happiness is to know the Savior
Living a life within His favor,
Having a change in my behavior
Happinesss is the Lord

Happiness is a new creation
Jesus in me in close relation
Having a part in His salvation
Happiness is the Lord
Real joy is mine
No matter if teardrops start,
I've found the secret --
It's Jesus in my heart!

Happiness is to be forgiven
Living the life that worth the living
Taking a trip that leads to heaven
Happiness is the Lord, Happiness is the Lord
Happiness is the Lord!
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/happy_am_i.php

Sweetly I trust in my Redeemer as I go singing on my way
So happy am I (yes so happy now), yes happy am I (very happy now)
Ever I know that He is with me, keeping my soul from day to day
So happy am I (happy now am I), yes happy am I (yes happy am I)

Chorus:
Happy am I with my Redeemer
Singing along the homeward way
And telling the lost (tell-) of (-ing) His (all) great love (the lost of His 
great mercy)
Happy am I to know He's with me (I'm always happy)
Keeping me spotless day by day (yes day by day)
I'm happy along (yes) the way (I'm happy) to heaven above (along the way, along 
the journey)

Sweetly I sing along the journey helping the lost to know His love
So happy am I (yes so happy now), yes happy am I (very happy now)
Hoping to meet Him in the morning in that sweet happy home above
So happy am I (happy now am I), yes happy am I (yes happy am I)

Repeat Chorus

Looking for Him most any moment, ready when Jesus shall appear
So happy am I (yes so happy now), yes happy am I (very happy now)
Keeping my lamp all trimmed and burning, feeling His coming now is near
So happy am I (happy now am I), yes happy am I (yes happy am I)

Repeat Chorus (x2)
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/happy_are_they_they_that_love_God.php

Happy are they, they that love God,
Whose hearts have Christ confessed,
Who by His cross have found their life,
And ’neath His yoke their rest.

Glad is the praise, sweet are the songs,
When they together sing;
And strong the prayers that bow the ear
Of Heaven’s eternal King.

Christ to their homes giveth His peace,
And makes their loves His own;
But ah, what tares the evil one
Hath in his garden sown.

Sad were our lot, evil this earth,
Did not its sorrows prove
The path whereby the sheep may find
The fold of Jesu’s love.

Then shall they know, they that love Him,
How all their pain is good;
And death itself cannot unbind
Their happy brotherhood.

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/happy_christmas_comes_once_more.php

The bells of Christmas chime once more;
The heavenly guest is at the door
He comes to earthly dwelling still
With new year gifts of peace, good will

This world though wide and far outspread,
Could scarcely find for you a bed
Your cradle was a manger stall
No pearl no silk no kingly hall

Now let us go with quiet mind,
The swaddled babe with shepherds find,
To gaze on him who gladdens them
The lovliest flow'r of Jesse's stem

O join with me, in gladness sing,
To keep our Christmas with our King,
Until our song, from loving souls,
Like rushing mighty water rolls!

O patriarchs' Joy, O prophets' Song
O Dayspring bright, awaited long
O son of Man, incarnate Word
Great David's Son, great David's Lord

Come, Jesus, glorious heav'nly guest,
And keep your Christmas in our breast
Then David's harpstrings, hushed so long,
Shall swell our jubilee of song.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/happy_in_the_savior.php

I am happy in the Lord for the love He showed to me,
And I’m resting on His precious promise;
Confiding in His Word, He will keep me pure and free,
And forever in His grace victorious. 

Refrain:
Happy in the Savior,
Happy in the Savior,
Happy in the Savior,
I am happy in the Lord. 

I am happy in the Lord since my sins are washed away,
I’ve His peace within my heart abiding;
He sanctified my soul, and the Blesser came to stay,
In the bosom of His love I’m hiding. 

I am happy in the Lord, for He gives me life and breath,
And He sweetens all my days with pleasure;
He’s all I need on earth; He’s my vict’ry over death,
He’s the secret of that hidden treasure. 

I am happy in the Lord for the place prepared for me,
Oh, how sweet the blessed consolation;
And though I fall asleep, I shall wake eternally,
In His likeness with His great salvation. 
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/happy_little_pilgrims.php

Happy little pilgrims,
We should ne’er be sad;
For the love of Jesus
Makes His children glad.
Refrain

Happy little pilgrims,
Going on our way,
To a land of beauty,
Singing all the day.

In that land so lovely,
Everything is bright,
There will be no sorrow,
There will be no night.

Refrain

Not alone we journey
To the mansions fair;
Jesus is our Shepherd;
He will lead us there.

Refrain
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/happy_soul_that_free_from_harms.php




Happy soul, that, free from harms,
Rests within his Shepherd’s arms!
Who his quiet shall molest?
Who shall violate his rest?
Jesus doth his spirit bear;
Jesus takes his every care;
He Who found the wandering sheep,
Jesus, still delights to keep.

O that I might so believe,
Steadfastly to Jesus cleave;
On His only love rely,
Smile at the destroyer nigh;
Free from sin and servile fear,
Have my Jesus ever near;
All His care rejoice to prove,
All His paradise of love!

Jesus, seek Thy wandering sheep;
Bring me back, and lead, and keep;
Take on Thee my every care;
Bear me, on Thy bosom bear;
Let me know my Shepherd’s voice;
More and more in Thee rejoice;
More and more of Thee receive;
Ever in Thy spirit live.

Live, till all Thy life I know,
Perfect, through my Lord, below;
Gladly then from earth remove,
Gathered to the fold above;
O that I at last may stand,
With the sheep at Thy right hand;
Take the crown so freely given,
Enter in by Thee to Heaven!
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/happy_sunbeams.php



We are happy sunbeams,
Shining day by day,
Making others happy as we go our way,
Bright’ning gloomy places,
Spreading mirth and cheer,
Always glowing brightly for our Savior dear.

Refrain

We are happy sunbeams,
Shining day by day,
Making others happy all along the way.

We are happy sunbeams,
Shining in the gloom,
Love’s true light reflecting as we journey home;
Much of care and sadness
Daily we remove
With our looks of kindness and our smiles of love.

Refrain

We are little sunbeams,
With bright gleam and glow,
We are helping others ev’rywhere we go;
Thus to our Redeemer
We will prove our love,
Till He bids us join Him in His home above.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/happy_the_home_when_God_is_there.php

Happy the home when God is there,
And love fills every breast;
When one their wish, and one their prayer,
And one their heav’nly rest.

Happy the home where Jesus’ Name
Is sweet to every ear;
Where children early speak His fame,
And parents hold Him dear.

Happy the home where prayer is heard,
And praise each day does rise;
Where parents love the sacred Word
And all its wisdom prize.

Lord, let us in our homes agree
This blessèd peace to gain;
Unite our hearts in love to Thee,
And love to all will reign.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/happy_the_man_that_finds_the_grace.php

Happy the man that finds the grace,
The blessing of God's chosen race,
The wisdom coming from above,
The faith that sweetly works by love.

Happy beyond description he
Who knows 'The Saviour died for me',
The gift unspeakable obtains,
And heav'nly understanding gains.

Wisdom divine! Who tells the price
Of wisdom's costly merchandise?
Wisdom to silver we prefer,
And gold is dross compared to her.

Her hands are filled with length of days,
True riches, and immortal praise,
Riches of Christ, on all bestowed,
And honour that descends from God.

To purest joys she all invites,
Chaste, holy, spiritual delights;
Her ways are ways of pleasantness,
And all her flowery paths are peace.

Happy the man who wisdom gains,
Thrice happy who his guest retains;
He owns, and shall for ever own,
Wisdom, and Christ, and heaven are one.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/happy_the_man_who_feareth_god.php

Happy the man who feareth God,
Whose feet His holy ways have trod;
Thine own good hand shall nourish thee,
And well and happy shalt thou be.

Thy wife shall, like a fruitful vine,
Fill all thy house with clusters fine;
Thy children all be fresh and sound,
Like olive-plants thy table round.

Lo! to the man these blessings cleave
Who in God’s holy fear doth live;
From him the ancient curse hath fled
By Adam’s race inherited.

Out of Mount Zion God shall send,
And crown with joy thy latter end;
That thou Jerusalem mayst see,
In favor and prosperity.

He shall be with thee in thy ways,
And give thee health and length of days;
Yea, thou shalt children’s children see,
And peace on Israel shall be.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/happy_the_man_whose_cautious_feet.php

Happy the man whose cautious feet
Shun the broad way that sinners go,
Who hates the place where atheists meet,
And fears to talk as scoffers do.

He loves t’employ the morning light
Amongst the statutes of the Lord;
And spends the wakeful hours of night,
With pleasure, pond’ring o’er His Word.

He, like a plant by gentle streams,
Shall flourish in immortal green;
And Heav’n will shine with kindest beams
On ev’ry work his hands begin.

But sinners find their counsels cross’d:
As chaff before the tempest flies,
So shall their hopes be blown and lost,
When the last trumpet shakes the skies.

In vain the rebel seeks to stand
In judgment with the pious race;
The dreadful Judge, with stern command,
Divides him to a diff’rent place.

“Straight is the way My saints have trod;
I bless’d the path, and drew it plain;
But you would choose the crooked road,
And down it leads to endless pain."


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/happy_the_souls_to_jesus_joined.php

Happy the souls to Jesus joined,
And saved by grace alone,
Walking in all His ways they find
Their heaven on earth begun.

The church triumphant in Thy love,
Their mighty joys we know;
They sing the Lamb in hymns above,
And we in hymns below.

Thee in Thy glorious realm they praise,
And bow before Thy throne,
We in the kingdom of Thy grace:
The kingdoms are but one.

The holy to the holiest leads,
From thence our spirits rise,
And he that in Thy statutes treads
Shall meet Thee in the skies.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/happy_town_of_salem.php

Happy town of Salem, set on Zion’s hill!
Happy hearts of pilgrims, could they see it still!
He that follows Jesus, He that dares the right,
Sees the lights of Salem gleam across the night.

Happy town of Salem, with the jasper wall!
In its many mansions there is room for all.
“Come to Me," says Jesus, “I will give you rest,"
And the town of Salem gathers all the blest.

Happy town of Salem, happy little feet
Of the children playing in the golden street!
“Let them come," says Jesus, “and forbid them not";
But the proud in Salem have no part or lot.

Happy town of Salem, with its open gates!
Happy are the pilgrims whom a welcome waits!
In the Name of Jesus, they an entrance claim,
And the guards of Salem answer, “In His Name."

Happy town of Salem, vision true of peace,
Seen above earth’s strivings, steadfast when they cease!
“Take thy cross," says Jesus, and the narrow way
Brings the feet to Salem at the break of day.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hard_fighting_soldiers.php



I am a hard fighting soldier, on the battlefield
I am a hard fighting soldier, on the battlefield
I am a hard fighting soldier, on the battlefield
I keep on bringin souls to Jesus
By the service that I give

I’ve got a helmet on my head, in my hand a sword and shield
I’ve got a helmet on my head, in my hand a sword and shield
I’ve got a helmet on my head, in my hand a sword and shield
I keep on bringin souls to Jesus
By the service that I give

You gotta walk right, talk right, sing right, pray right, on the battlefield
You gotta walk right, talk right, sing right, pray right, on the battlefield
You gotta walk right, talk right, sing right, pray right, on the battlefield
I keep on bringin souls to Jesus
By the service that I give

I am a hard fighting soldier, on the battlefield
I am a hard fighting soldier, on the battlefield
I am a hard fighting soldier, on the battlefield
I keep on bringin souls to Jesus
I keep bringin souls to Jesus
We keep bringin souls to Jesus
By the service that we give

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hard_pressed1.php

We are hard pressed on every side
But not crushed 
Perplexed, but not in despair 

Persecuted but not abandoned
Struck down, but not destroyed
Persecuted but not abandoned
Struck down 

Repeat All 

We are hard pressed on every side
But not crushed 

Perplexed, but not in despair 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_creations_allelulia.php

Hark, creation's alleluia,
rising from a thousand shores,
vibrates sweet as angel voices,
loud as many waters, roars--
"Blessing, glory, power, salvation
to our God upon the throne,
Father, Son and Holy Spirit,
infinite, supreme, alone."

Gathering strength from every nation,
every kindred, tribe, and tongue,
hark, that everlasting anthem,
hark, that glorious tide of song,
floods the valleys with its music,
echoes from the lasting hills,
onward, upward, till the temple
of the living God it fills.

Hark, it mingles with the raptures
of the armies of the sky,
who have passed through tribulation
into perfect rest on high,
clothed in robes of spotless beauty,
palms of triumph in their hand,
harping on their harps hosannas,
as before his face they stand:

"Glory unto him who loved us,
him who washed us with his blood,
kings and priests henceforth for ever
to our Father and our God.
Alleluia! saints and angels,
raise your loudest, loftiest strains!
Alleluia! hell is vanquished;
God, the Lord Almighty, reigns."
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_from_on_high_those_blissful_strains.php

Hark from on high those blissful strains!
Whence can such sweetness be?
Have angels waked their golden harps
With Heav’ns own minstrelsy?
With Heav’ns own minstrelsy?

Or do we hear the cherub voice
Of infant bands who raise,
Soaring from earth celestial notes
In their Creator’s praise?
In their Creator’s praise?

Thus spake the shepherds—yet with dread,
So strange the sounds they heard,
While o’er their slumb’ring flocks they kept
Their wonted nightly guard,
Their wonted nightly guard.

And soon they saw a dazzling light
Beam through the starry way,
And shining seraphs clust’ring where
The infant Jesus lay,
The infant Jesus lay.

They came a Savior’s birth to tell,
And tunes of rapture sing;
Hence the glad notes that filled the air—
Each swept his loudest string,
Each swept his loudest string.

But now in accents soft and kind
The chieftain angel said,
“Heav’ns tidings of great joy we bear—
Shepherds, be not afraid,
Shepherds, be not afraid."

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_how_all_the_welkin_rings.php

Hark, how all the welkin rings,
"Glory to the King of kings;
peace on earth, and mercy mild,
God and sinners reconciled!"

Joyful, all ye nations, rise,
join the triumph of the skies;
universal nature say,
"Christ the Lord is born today!"

Christ, by highest Heaven adored,
Christ, the everlasting Lord:
late in time behold him come,
offspring of a Virgin's womb!

Veiled in flesh, the Godhead see,
hail the incarnate Deity!
pleased as man with men to appear,
Jesus, our Emmanuel here!

Hail, the heavenly Prince of Peace,
Hail, the Sun of Righteousness!
Light and life to all he brings,
risen with healing in his wings.

Mild he lays his glory by,
born that man no more may die;
born to raise the sons of earth;
born to give them second birth.

Come, Desire of nations, come,
fix in us thy humble home;
rise, the woman's conquering Seed,
bruise in us the serpent's head.

Now display thy saving power,
ruined nature now restore;
now in mystic union join
thine to ours, and ours to thine. 

Adam's likeness, Lord, efface, 
Stamp thy image in its place. 
Second Adam from above, 
Reinstate us in thy love. 

Let us thee, though lost, regain, 
Thee, the life, the inner man: 
O, to all thyself impart, 
Formed in each believing heart. 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_the_bells.php

Bells of praise! Bells of praise!
How the merry bells are ringing,
Joyous notes their message bringing!
Come where love and mercy meet,
Bells of praise ring clear and sweet.
Refrain

Hark to the bells so sweetly blending;
Go with heart and voice attending;
Love and mercy meet you there,
In this hour of praise and prayer.

Bells of prayer! Bells of prayer!
Oh, how tenderly the pleading,
Weary, longing souls entreating,
Have a pardon full and free!
Bells of prayer entreating thee!

Refrain

Bells of joy! Bells of joy!
Loud and clear the peals are telling
Of the songs of praises swelling.
Worship in yon temple hall;
Bells of joy proclaim the call.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_the_church_proclaims_her_honor.php

1. Hark! The Church proclaims her honor,
And her strength is only this:
God hath laid His choice upon her,
And the work she doth is His. 

2. He His Church hath firmly founded,
He will guard what He began;
We, by sin and foes surrounded,
Build her bulwarks as we can. 

3. Frail and fleeting are our powers,
Short our days, our foresight dim,
And we own the choice not ours,
We were chosen first by Him. 

4. Onward, then! For naught despairing,
Calm we follow at His word,
Thus through joy and sorrow bearing
Faithful witness to our Lord. 

5. Though we here must strive in weakness,
Though in tears we often bend,
What His might began in meekness
Shall achieve a glorious end.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_the_song_of_jubilee.php

Hark! the song of jubilee,
Loud as mighty thunders roar,
Or the fullness of the sea
When it breaks upon the shore:
Hallelujah! for the Lord
God omnipotent shall reign;
Hallelujah! let the word
Echo round the earth and main.

Hallelujah! hark! the sound
From the depths unto the skies,
Wakes above, beneath, around,
All creation’s harmonies;
See Jehovah’s banner furled,
Sheathed His sword; He speaks; ’tis done!
And the kingdoms of this world
Are the kingdoms of His Son.

He shall reign from pole to pole
With illimitable sway;
He shall reign, when, like a scroll
Yonder heavens have passed away:
Then the end; beneath His rod
Man’s last enemy shall fall;
Hallelujah! Christ in God,
God in Christ, is all in all.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_tis_the_shepards_voice_I_hear.php

Hark! ’tis the Shepherd’s voice I hear
Out in the desert dark and drear,
Calling the sheep who’ve gone astray
Far from the Shepherd’s fold away.

Refrain

Bring them in, bring them in,
Bring them in from the fields of sin;
Bring them in, bring them in,
Bring the wand’ring ones to Jesus.

Who’ll go and help this Shepherd kind,
Help Him the wand’ring ones to find?
Who’ll bring the lost ones to the fold,
Where they’ll be sheltered from the cold?

Refrain

Out in the desert hear their cry,
Out on the mountains wild and high;
Hark! ’tis the Master speaks to thee,
“Go find My sheep where’er they be."

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_tis_the_watchmans_cry.php

Hark! ’tis the watchman’s cry,
“Wake, brethren, wake!"
Jesus our Lord is nigh;
Wake, brethren, wake!
Sleep is for sons of night;
Ye are children of the light,
Yours is the glory bright;
Wake, brethren, wake!

Call to each waking band,
“Watch, brethren, watch!"
Clear is our Lord’s command;
Watch, brethren, watch!
Be ye as men that wait
Always at the Master’s gate,
E’en though He tarry late;
Watch, brethren, watch!

Heed we the steward’s call,
“Work, brethren, work!"
There’s room enough for all;
Work, brethren, work!
This vineyard of the Lord
Constant labor will afford;
Yours is a sure reward;
Work, brethren, work!

Hear we the Shepherd’s voice,
“Pray, brethren, pray!"
Would ye His heart rejoice?
Pray, brethren, pray!
Sin calls for constant fear,
Weakness needs the Strong One near
Long as ye struggle here;
Pray, brethren, pray!

Now sound the final chord,
“Praise, brethren, praise!"
Thrice holy is our Lord;
Praise, brethren, praise!
What more befits the tongues
Soon to lead the angels’ songs,
While Heav’n the note prolongs,
Praise, brethren, praise!
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_a_thrilling_voice_is_sounding.php

Hark! a thrilling voice is sounding;
“Christ is nigh," it seems to say,
“Cast away the works of darkness,
O ye children of the day."

Wakened by the solemn warning
Let the earthbound soul arise;
Christ, her Sun, all ill dispelling,
Shines upon the morning skies.

Lo, the Lamb, so long expected,
Comes with pardon down from Heav’n;
Let us haste, with tears of sorrow,
One and all to be forgiven.

That when next He comes in glory,
And the world is wrapped in fear,
With His mercy He may shield us,
And with words of love draw near.

Honor, glory, might, and blessing
Be to God: the Father, Son
And the everlasting Spirit,
While eternal ages run.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_a_voice_divides_the_sky.php

Hark! A voice divides the sky, happy are the faithful dead!
In the Lord who sweetly die, they from all their toils are freed;
Them the Spirit hath declared blessed, unutterably blessed;
Jesus is their great reward, Jesus is their endless rest.

Followed by their works, they go where their Head has gone before;
Reconciled by grace below, grace has opened mercy’s door;
Justified through faith alone, here they knew their sins forgiven,
Here they laid their burden down, hallowed, and made fit for heaven.

Who can now lament the lot of a saint in Christ deceased?
Let the world, who know us not, call us hopeless and unblessed:
When from flesh the spirit freed hastens homeward to return,
Mortals cry, “A man is dead!" Angels sing, “A child is born!"

Born into the world above, they our happy brother greet,
Bear him to the throne of love, place him at the Savior’s feet;
Jesus smiles, and says, “Well done, good and faithful servant thou;
Enter, and receive thy crown, reign with Me triumphant now."

Angels catch the approving sound, bow, and bless the just award;
Hail the heir with glory crowned, now rejoicing with his Lord:
Fuller joys ordained to know, waiting for the general doom,
When the archangel’s trump shall blow, “Rise, ye dead, to judgment come!"


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_from_the_tombs_a_doleful_sound.php

Hark! from the tombs a doleful sound;
My ears, attend the cry;
“Ye living men, come view the ground
Where you must shortly lie.

“Princes, this clay must be your bed,
In spite of all your towers;
The tall, the wise, the rev’rend head
Must lie as low as ours!"

Great God! is this our certain doom?
And are we still secure?
Still walking downward to our tomb,
And yet prepare no more?

Grant us the powers of quick’ning grace,
To fit our souls to fly,
Then, when we drop this dying flesh,
We’ll rise above the sky.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_hark_the_song_gliding_along.php

Hark, hark the song, gliding along,
Borne on the summer breeze, far, far away;
Dear Sabbath home, once more we come,
Hailing with glad delight this happy day;
Eyes beaming brightly, hearts bounding lightly,
Now we sing our merry, merry lay.

Refrain

Dear Sabbath home, once more we come,
Hailing with glad delight this happy day.

Green shady bowers, sweet blushing flowers,
Come with the summer time, blooming anew;
Morn’s gentle ray, golden and gay,
Shines on the lily-bells sparkling with dew;
Beauty is calling, music is falling,
Now again earth wakes her joyful lay.

Refrain

Hark, hark the song, floating along,
Borne to the sunny land fadeless and fair;
Savior and King, gladly we bring
Praise for Thy precious love, Thy tender care;
Gathered before Thee, young hearts adore Thee,
Savior, hear, O hear our happy lay.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_hark_the_notes_of_joy.php

Hark! hark!—the notes of joy
Roll o’er the heavenly plains,
And seraphs find employ
For their sublimest strains;
Some new delight in heaven is known,
Loud sound the harps around the throne.

Hark! hark!—the sounds draw nigh,
The joyful hosts descend;
Jesus forsakes the sky,
To earth His footsteps bend;
He comes to bless our fallen race;
He comes with messages of grace.

Bear, bear the tidings round;
Let every mortal know
What love in God is found,
What pity He can show;
Ye winds that blow! ye waves that roll!
Bear the glad news from pole to pole.

Strike, strike the harps again,
To great Immanuel’s Name;
Arise, ye sons of men!
And all His grace proclaim;
Angels and men! wake every string
’Tis God the Savior’s praise we sing.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_hark_my_soul_allon.php

Hark, hark, my soul! the Savior’s voice is calling,
E’en now it breathes o’er life’s dark troubled sea;
His gracious truth like heav’nly dew is falling;
Hark, hark, my soul! thy Father calls for thee!
Father of mercy, Father of love!
Thee would we follow to our blest home above.

Hark, hark, my soul! from Heav’n that voice is pleading
With thee, ere evil days draw darkly near;
Still by His Word our Father’s hand is leading,
From sin and shame, from sorrow, doubt and fear.
Father of mercy, Father of love!
Thee would we follow to our blest home above.

Hark, hark, my soul! still, still that voice is sounding
Like music sweet, from some far distant shore,
While angel bands, our daily path surrounding,
Lead God’s dear children on forevermore.
Father of mercy, Father of love!
Thee would we follow to our blest home above.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_hark_my_soul_faber.php

Hark! hark, my soul! angelic songs are swelling,
O’er earth’s green fields and ocean’s wave-beat shore:
How sweet the truth those blessèd strains are telling
Of that new life when sin shall be no more.

Refrain

Angels of Jesus, angels of light,
Singing to welcome the pilgrims of the night!

Darker than night life’s shadows fall around us,
And like benighted men we miss our mark:
God hides Himself, and grace hath scarcely found us,
E’er death finds out his victims in the dark.

Refrain

Far, far away, like bells at evening pealing,
The voice of Jesus sounds o’er land and sea;
And laden souls, by thousands meekly stealing,
Kind Shepherd, turn their weary steps to Thee.

Refrain

Onward we go, for still we hear them singing,
“Come, weary souls, for Jesus bids you come";
And through the dark, its echoes sweetly ringing,
The music of the Gospel leads us home.

Refrain

Rest comes at length: though life be long and dreary,
The day must dawn, and darksome night be past;
Faith’s journeys end in welcome to the weary,
And Heaven, the heart’s true home, will come at last.

Refrain

Cheer up, my soul! faith’s moonbeams softly glisten
Upon the breast of life’s most troubled sea,
And it will cheer thy drooping heart to listen
To those brave songs which angels mean for thee.

Refrain

Angels, sing on, your faithful watches keeping;
Sing us sweet fragments of the songs above,
Till morning’s joy shall end the night of weeping,
And life’s long shadows break in cloudless love.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_how_time's_wide_sounding_bell.php

Hark! how time’s wide sounding bell
Strikes on each attentive ear!
Tolling loud the solemn knell
Of the late departed year:
Years, like mortals, wear away,
Have their birth, and dying day;
Youthful spring, and wintry age,
Then to others quit the stage.

Sad experience may relate
What a year the last has been!
Crops of sorrow have been great,
From the fruitful seeds of sin:
O! what numbers gay and blithe,
Fell by death’s unsparing scythe?
While they thought the world their own,
Suddenly he mowed them down.

See how war, with dreadful stride,
Marches at the Lord’s command,
Spreading desolation wide,
Through a once much-favored land:
War, with heart and arms of steel,
Preys on thousands at a meal;
Daily drinking human gore,
Still he thirsts, and calls for more.

If the God, Whom we provoke,
Hither should His way direct;
What a sin-avenging stroke
May a land, like this, expect!
They who now securely sleep,
Quickly then, would wake and weep;
And too late would learn to fear,
When they saw the danger near.

You are safe, who know His love,
He will all His truth perform;
To your souls a refuge prove
From the rage of every storm:
But we tremble for the youth;
Teach them, Lord, Thy saving truth;
Join them to Thy faithful few,
Be to them a Refuge too.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_i_hear_a_sound_from_ore_the_water.php

Hark! I hear a sound from o’er the water,
’Tis the cry of anguish and despair;
’Tis the cry of precious souls in darkness,
While waiting for the light of Jesus, there;
Hear the idle laborers near us saying,
“Master what wilt Thou have me to do?"
The harvest now is great, oh! haste, my brother,
The reapers few.

Refrain

Who will go? Who will go?
To the ends of the earth,
Hast thou a passion for the lost?
Dost thou realize what a soul is worth?
Who will go? Who will go?
Tell of Jesus’ death upon the tree?
Oh! who will answer quickly,
“Here am I, O Lord, send me"?

Will you go and tell them of a Savior?
Tell them how He suffered on the tree?
Will you give your very life to save them?
And tell them Jesus came to set them free?
Will you take the way, endure the suffering?
Finding in the cross your only rest?
For suffering here with Jesus brings the glory,
His ways are best.

Refrain

We will follow, we will follow Jesus,
Willingly and gladly we’ll obey,
He will never leave us nor forsake us,
He is our Friend, our Comforter and Stay.
Though He lead us o’er the briny ocean,
Though He lead us o’er the sandy plain,
We still will trust in Jesus Christ our Savior,
Oh! praise His Name.

Refrain

After we’ve received the Spirit’s fullness,
Filling all our hearts with love divine,
We’re to witness to the blessèd Gospel,
In every nation, country, land and clime,
When we give the Gospel as a witness
Unto every people far and near,
With lightning flash, we’ll see in clouds of glory
The King appear.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_the_skies_with_music_sound.php

Hark! the skies with music sound,
Heav’nly glory beams around;
Christ is born! the angels sing
Glory to the newborn King.

Peace is come, goodwill appears;
Sinners wipe away your tears;
Christ for you in flesh today
Humbly in the manger lay.

Shepherds, tending flocks by night,
Heard the song, and saw the light;
Took their reeds, and softest strains
Echoed through the happy plains.

Mortals, hail the glorious King!
Richest incense cheerful bring;
Praise and love Immanuel’s Name,
And His boundless grace proclaim.

Glory, praise, and blessing be,
Lord, our Savior, unto Thee;
Thee let heaven and earth adore,
God o’er all forevermore.




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_the_sound_of_holy_voices.php

Hark! the sound of holy voices, chanting at the crystal sea,
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Lord, to Thee;
Multitude, which none can number, like the stars in glory stand
Clothed in white apparel, holding palms of victory in their hand.

Patriarch, and holy prophet, who prepared the way of Christ
King, apostle, saint, confessor, martyr and evangelist;
Saintly maiden, godly matron, widows who have watched to prayer
Joined in holy concert, singing to the Lord of all, are there.

They have come from tribulation, and have washed their robes in blood,
Washed them in the blood of Jesus; tried they were, and firm they stood;
Mocked, imprisoned, stoned, tormented, sawn asunder, slain with sword;
They have conquered death and Satan by the might of Christ the Lord.

Marching with Thy cross their banner, they have triumphed, following
Thee, the Captain of salvation, Thee, their Savior and their King;
Gladly, Lord, with Thee they suffered; gladly, Lord, with Thee they died;
And by death to life immortal they were born and glorified.

Now they reign in heav’nly glory, now they walk in golden light,
Now they drink, as from a river, holy bliss and infinite:
Love and peace they taste forever, and all truth and knowledge see
In the beatific vision of the blessèd Trinity.

God of God, the One begotten, Light of light, Emmanuel,
In Whose body joined together all the saints forever dwell;
Pour upon us of Thy fullness that we may forevermore
God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost adore.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_to_the_music_resounding.php

Hark to the music resounding,
Reapers are needed today;
Fields are all white, to the harvest
Let us be up and away!
Ever the Master is calling,
Hasten! the shadows are falling;
On to the harvest field,
Gather the golden yield,
Precious sheaves.

Refrain

Hark! hark! comes the song,
On! on! join the throng;
Forth with joyful, loving heart,
Bravely do your part;
Hark! hark! rings the call;
Haste! haste! one and all;
On where the harvest stands,
Waiting for willing hands
Souls to win.

Forward with hearts full of gladness,
Reapers, I pray you, make haste;
Grain there is ready and waiting,
If not soon gathered, will waste;
Then let us hear you replying,
Labor with courage undying,
Send up a word of cheer,
Tell of the rest so near,
Rest at home.

Refrain

Hark to the song they are singing!
See, they have treasures so rare;
Soon will the harvest be ended,
Haste, then, their trophies to share.
Let no one be idly dreaming,
Look! look! the harvest is gleaming,
Join ye the reaping band,
Lend them a helping hand,
Ere the night.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_what_a_sound.php

Hark, what a sound, and too divine for hearing,
Stirs on the earth and trembles in the air!
Is it the thunder of the Lord’s appearing?
Is it the music of His people’s prayer?

Surely He cometh, and a thousand voices
Shout to the saints and to the deaf and dumb;
Surely He cometh, and the earth rejoices,
Glad in His coming Who hath sworn, “I come."

So even I, and with a pang more thrilling,
So even I, and with a hope more sweet,
Yearn for the sign, O Christ, of Thy fulfilling,
Faint for the flaming of Thine advent feet.

Yea, through life, death, through sorrow and through sinning,
He shall suffice me, for He hath sufficèd;
Christ is the end, for Christ was the beginning,
Christ the beginning, for the end is Christ.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_what_mean_those_holy_voices.php

Hark! what mean those holy voices,
Sweetly sounding through the skies?
Lo! the angelic host rejoices
Heavenly hallelujahs rise.

Listen to the wondrous story,
Which they chant in hymns of joy;
“Glory in the highest, glory;
Glory be to God most high!

“Peace on earth, good will from heaven,
Reaching far as man is found;
Souls redeemed, and sins forgiven;
Loud our golden harps shall sound.

“Christ is born, the great Anointed;
Heaven and earth His praises sing:
O receive whom God appointed,
For your Prophet, Priest and King.

“Hasten, mortals to adore Him;
Learn His Name and taste His joy;
Till in heaven you sing before Him,
Glory be to God most high!"

Let us learn the wondrous story
Of our great Redeemer’s birth;
Spread the brightness of His glory
Till it cover all the earth.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_how_the_watchmen_cry.php

Hark, how the watchmen cry,
Attend the trumpet’s sound!
Stand to your arms, the foe is nigh,
The powers of hell surround:
Who bow to Christ’s command,
Your arms and hearts prepare!
The day of battle is at hand!
Go forth to glorious war!

See on the mountain-top
The standard of your God!
In Jesus’ Name I lift it up,
All stained with hallowed blood.
His standard-bearer, I
To all the nations call,
Let all to Jesus’ cross draw nigh!
He bore the cross for all. 

Go up with Christ your Head,
Your Captain’s footsteps see;
Follow your Captain, and be led
To certain victory.
All power to Him is giv’n,
He ever reigns the same;
Salvation, happiness, and Heav’n
Are all in Jesus’ Name. 

Only have faith in God;
In faith your foes assail,
Not wrestling against flesh and blood,
But all the powers of hell;
From thrones of glory driv’n,
By flaming vengeance hurled,
They throng the air, and darken Heav’n,
And rule the lower world.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_my_soul_how_everything.php

Hark, my soul, how everything
Strives to serve our bounteous King;
Each a double tribute pays,
Sings its parts, and then obeys.

Nature’s chief and sweetest choir
Him with cheerful notes admire;
Chanting every day their lauds,
While the grove their song applauds.

Though their voices lower be,
Streams have too their melody;
Night and day they warbling run,
Never pause, but still sing on.

All the flowers that gild the spring
Hither their still music bring;
If heaven bless them, thankful, they
Smell more sweet, and look more gay.

Only we can scarce afford
This short office to our Lord;
We, on whom His bounty flows,
All things gives, and nothing owes.

Wake! for shame, my sluggish heart,
Wake! and gladly sing thy part;
Learn of birds, and springs, and flowers,
How to use thy nobler powers.

Call whole nature to thy aid;
Since ’twas He whole nature made;
Join in one eternal song,
Who to one God all belong.

Live forever, glorious Lord!
Live by all Thy works adored,
One in Three, and Three in One,
Thrice we bow to Thee alone.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_my_soul_it_is_the_lord.php

Hark, my soul, it is the Lord!
’Tis thy Savior, hear His Word;
Jesus speaks, and speaks to thee,
“Say, poor, sinner, lovest thou Me?"

“I delivered thee when bound,
And, when bleeding, healed thy wound;
Sought thee wandering, set thee right,
Turned thy darkness into light.

“Can a woman’s tender care
Cease toward the child she bare?
Yes, she may forgetful be,
Yet will I remember thee.

“Mine is an unchanging love,
Higher than the heights above,
Deeper than the depths beneath,
Free and faithful, strong as death.

“Thou shalt see My glory soon,
When the work of grace is done;
Partner of My throne shalt be:
Say, poor sinner, lovest thou Me?"

Lord, it is my chief complaint
That my love is weak and faint;
Yet I love Thee, and adore:
O for grace to love Thee more!



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_ten_thousand_harps_and_voices.php

Hark, ten thousand harps and voices
Sound the note of praise above!
Jesus reigns, and Heav’n rejoices,
Jesus reigns, the God of love;
See, He sits on yonder throne;
Jesus rules the world alone.

Refrain

Hallelujah! Hallelujah!
Hallelujah! Amen!

Jesus, hail! Whose glory brightens
All above, and gives it worth;
Lord of life, Thy smile enlightens,
Cheers, and charms Thy saints on earth;
When we think of love like Thine,
Lord, we own it love divine.

Refrain

Come, ye saints, unite your praises
With the angels round His throne;
Soon, we hope, our God will raise us
To the place where He is gone.
Meet it is that we should sing,
Glory, glory, to our King!

Refrain

Sing how Jesus came from heaven,
How He bore the cross below,
How all power to Him is given,
How He reigns in glory now.
’Tis a great and endless theme
O, ’tis sweet to sing of Him.

Refrain

King of glory, reign forever!
Thine an everlasting crown.
Nothing from Thy love shall sever
Those whom Thou hast made Thine own:
Happy objects of Thy grace,
Destined to behold Thy face.

Refrain

Savior, hasten Thine appearing;
Bring, O bring the glorious day,
When, the awful summons bearing,
Heaven and earth shall pass away;
Then with golden harps we’ll sing,
“Glory, glory to our King!"

Refrain





https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_ten_thousand_voices.php

Hark! ten thousand voices sounding,
Far and wide throughout the sky;
’Tis the voice of joy abounding,
Jesus lives no more to die.

Jesus lives, His conflict over,
Lives to claim His great reward;
Angels round the Victor hover,
Crowding to behold their Lord.

Yonder throne for Him erected
Now becomes the Victor’s seat;
Lo, the Man on earth rejected,
Angels worship at His feet!

All the powers of Heav’n adore Him,
All obey His sovereign Word;
Day and night they cry before Him,
“Holy, Holy, Holy Lord!"


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_ten_thousand_voices_crying.php

Hark! ten thousand voices crying,
“Lamb of God!" with one accord;
Thousand thousand saints replying,
Wake at once the echoing chord.

“Praise the Lamb," the chorus waking,
All in heaven together throng;
Loud and far each tongue partaking
Rolls around the endless song.

Grateful incense this, ascending
Ever to the Father’s throne:
Every knee to Jesus bending,
All in mind in heaven is one.

All the Father’s counsels claiming
Equal honors to the Son,
All the Son’s effulgence beaming,
Makes the Father’s glory known.

By the Spirit all pervading,
Hosts unnumbered round the Lamb,
Crowned with light and joy unfading,
Hail Him as the great “I AM."

Joyful now the new creation
Rests in undisturbed repose,
Blest in Jesus’ full salvation,
Sorrow now nor thralldom knows.

Hark! the heavenly notes again!
Loudly swells the song of praise;
Through creation’s vault, Amen!
Amen! responsive joy doth raise.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_the_glad_sound.php

Hark, the glad sound! the Savior comes,
The Savior promised long;
Let every heart prepare a throne,
And every voice a song.

On Him the Spirit, largely poured,
Exerts His sacred fire;
Wisdom and might, and zeal and love,
His holy breast inspire.

He comes the prisoners to release,
In Satan’s bondage held;
The gates of brass before Him burst,
The iron fetters yield.

He comes, from thickest films of vice
To clear the mental ray,
And on the eyes oppressed with night
To pour celestial day.

He comes the broken heart to bind,
The bleeding soul to cure;
And with the treasures of His grace
To enrich the humble poor.

His silver trumpets publish loud
The jub’lee of the Lord
Our debts are all remitted now
Our heritage restored.

Our glad hosannas, Prince of Peace,
Thy welcome shall proclaim;
And Heav’n’s eternal arches ring
With Thy belovèd Name.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_the_herald_the_angels_sing.php

Hark! The herald angels sing,
“Glory to the newborn King;
Peace on earth, and mercy mild,
God and sinners reconciled!"
Joyful, all ye nations rise,
Join the triumph of the skies;
With th’angelic host proclaim,
“Christ is born in Bethlehem!"


Refrain

Hark! the herald angels sing,
“Glory to the newborn King!"

Christ, by highest Heav’n adored;
Christ the everlasting Lord;
Late in time, behold Him come,
Offspring of a virgin’s womb.
Veiled in flesh the Godhead see;
Hail th’incarnate Deity,
Pleased with us in flesh to dwell,
Jesus our Emmanuel.

Refrain

Hail the heav’nly Prince of Peace!
Hail the Sun of Righteousness!
Light and life to all He brings,
Ris’n with healing in His wings.
Mild He lays His glory by,
Born that man no more may die.
Born to raise the sons of earth,
Born to give them second birth.

Refrain

Come, Desire of nations, come,
Fix in us Thy humble home;
Rise, the woman’s conqu’ring Seed,
Bruise in us the serpent’s head.
Now display Thy saving power,
Ruined nature now restore;
Now in mystic union join
Thine to ours, and ours to Thine.

Refrain

Adam’s likeness, Lord, efface,
Stamp Thine image in its place:
Second Adam from above,
Reinstate us in Thy love.
Let us Thee, though lost, regain,
Thee, the Life, the inner man:
O, to all Thyself impart,
Formed in each believing heart.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_the_sounds_melodious_stealing.php

Hark, the sounds melodious stealing
Thro’ the quiet midnight air;
Sweet, seraphic music pealing
Over all the landscape fair.
Angel hosts of brightest glory,
Hover o’er a lowly bed—
Bed of Him foretold in story,
Son of Man, creation’s Head.

Refrain

Singing, Glory to God,
Glory to God,
Glory to God in the highest,
Singing, Glory to God,
Glory to God,
Glory to God in the highest,

Wise men traveled till they found Him,
Found a King in Bethlehem!
King, with sheep and cattle ’round Him?
King, without a diadem?
Yes! the Prince of Peace eternal,
King of kings, of lords the Lord!
Hark! the swelling choirs supernal
As they join with one accord:

Refrain

Let us lift our hearts and voices
Prince Immanuel’s praise to sing;
While the heav’nly host rejoices,
Let us, too, our tribute bring.
Heav’nward, now, His star is pointing,
Where He sits at God’s right hand,
Unto each His crown appointing,
Who before His throne shall stand.

Refrain



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_the_sounds_of_singing.php

Hark! the sounds of singing
Coming on the breeze,
Notes of triumph winging
Over lands and seas.
Martial hosts assemble,
Flushed with victory,
Hell’s battalions tremble
And prepare to flee.

Refrain

Army of salvation!
Army of the Lord!
Christ our Inspiration
Christ our great Reward.

Whence have come these legions,
Valiant, free and strong?
Worldwide are the regions
Where they combat wrong.
Gathering ’neath our banner
While the trumpets blend,
Here in fervent manner
Let our praise ascend.

Refrain

Plucked as brands from burning,
Saved by Jesus’ might,
Earth’s allurement spurning,
We for Christ will fight.
He Who found and freed us
From our captive chain,
Surely He will lead us
To eternal gain.

Refrain

Wondrous, wondrous story
Of our God-made host,
Unto Jesus glory
’Tis in Him we boast.
Out of every nation,
By His might restored,
Army of salvation,
Army of the Lord.

Refrain



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_the_springtide_breezes.php

Hark! the springtide breezes pass the news along,
Jesus Christ has risen, fill the world with song;
Earth and all her voices sing glad hosannas to the King,
Praises to our Lord we bring, Hallelujah!

Refrain

Glory, hallelujah! Praise the victor King,
Who to all His people life and light doth bring,
Glory, hallelujah! Praise the victor King,
Who to all His people life and light doth bring.

Finished is the conflict, all the battles o’er,
Peace that passeth knowledge comes to us once more,
Raise your notes of triumph high, Jesus lives no more to die,
Earth and Heav’n with joy reply, Hallelujah!

Refrain

Golden gates are lifted, doors stand open wide,
Lo! the King is standing at His Father’s side,
In the land of endless light angels praise Him, day and night,
Crown Him ever Lord of might, Hallelujah!

Refrain

Hallelujah! Hallelujah!


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_the_tramp_of_coming_legions.php

Hark, the sound of coming legions,
O how joyful is the sound,
’Tis the children’s army marching,
On the Master’s errands bound.
See their faces all are glowing
With the joyous light of youth
As they’re marching, onward marching
For the cause of Right and Truth.

Refrain

Hark, the tramp of coming legions,
O how joyful is the sound,
’Tis the children’s army marching,
On the Master’s errands bound.

Hark, the tramp of coming legions,
Hosts of Satan now must quail,
They must scatter in confusion
When this army shall prevail.
At the summons of the Master,
See the children fall in line,
Marching on with glad endeavor,
Trusting in the help divine.

Refrain

Hark, the tramp of coming legions,
Marching onward millions strong,
They shall surely be victorious
O’er the hosts of sin and wrong.
Ever loyal to the Master,
Strong their hearts shall be and brave,
Till the Gospel’s glorious banner
Over all the world shall wave.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_the_vesper_hymn_is_stealing.php

Hark! the vesper hymn is stealing
O’er the waters soft and clear;
Nearer yet and nearer pealing
Soft it breaks upon the ear,
Jubilate! Jubilate! Jubilate! Amen!
Farther now and farther stealing
Soft it fades upon the ear.

Now like moonlight waves retreating
To the shore it dies along;
Now like angry surges meeting
Breaks the mingled tide of song.
Jubilate! Jubilate! Jubilate! Amen!
Hark! again like waves retreating
To the shore it dies along.

Once again sweet voices ringing
Louder still the music swells;
While on summer breezes winging
Comes the chime of vesper bells.
Jubilate! Jubilate! Jubilate! Amen!
On the summer breezes winging
Fades the chime of vesper bells.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_the_voice_eternal.php

Hark! the voice eternal, robed in majesty,
Caging into being earth and sea and sky
Hark! in countless numbers all the angel throng
Hail creation痴 morning with one burst of song.
High in regal glory, 知id eternal light,
Reign, O King immortal, holy, infinite.

Bright the world and glorious, calm both earth and sea,
Noble in its grandeur stood man痴 purity;
Came the great transgression, came the saddening fall,
Death and desolation breathing over all.
Still in regal glory, 知id eternal light,
Reigned the King immortal, holy, infinite.

Long the nations waited, through the troubled night,
Looking, longing, yearning, for the promised light.
Prophets saw the morning breaking far away,
Minstrels sang the splendor of that opening day;
Whilst in regal glory, 知id eternal light,
Reigned the King immortal, holy, infinite.

Brightly dawned the advent of the newborn King,
Joyously the watchers heard the angels sing.
Sadly closed the evening of His hallowed life,
As the noontide darkness veiled the last dread strife
Lo! again in glory, 知id eternal light,
Reigns the King immortal, holy, infinite.

Lo! again He cometh, robed in clouds of fight,
As the Judge eternal, armed with power and might.
Nations to His footstool gathered then shall be;
Earth shall yield her treasures, and her dead, the sea.
Till the trumpet soundeth, 知id eternal light
Reign, thou King immortal, holy, infinite.

Jesus! Lord and Master, Prophet, Priest, and King,
To thy feet, triumphant, hallowed praise we bring.
Thine the pain and weeping, Thine the victory;
Power, and praise, and honor, be, O Lord, to Thee.
High in regal glory, 知id eternal light,
Reign, O King immortal, holy, infinite.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_the_voice_of_jesus_calling.php

Hark, the voice of Jesus calling,
“Who will go and work today?
Fields are ripe and harvests waiting,
Who will bear the sheaves away?"
Long and loud the Master calls us,
Rich reward He offers free;
Who will answer, gladly saying,
“Here am I, send me, send me"?

If you cannot cross the ocean,
And the distant lands explore,
You can find the lost around you,
You can help them at your door;
If you cannot give your thousands,
You can give the widow’s mite;
What you truly give for Jesus,
Will be precious in His sight.

If you cannot speak like angels,
If you cannot preach like Paul,
You can tell the love of Jesus,
You can say He died for all.
If you cannot rouse the wicked,
With the judgment’s dread alarms,
You can lead the little children
To the Savior’s waiting arms.

If you cannot be the watchman,
Standing high on Zion’s wall,
Pointing out the path to heaven,
Offering life and peace to all,
With your prayers and with your bounties
You can do what heaven demands;
You can be like faithful Aaron,
Holding up the prophet’s hands.

If among the older people,
You may not be apt to teach,
“Feed My lambs," said Christ, our Shepherd,
“Place the food within their reach."
And it may be that the children
You have led with trembling hand,
Will be found among your jewels,
When you reach the better land.

Let none hear you idly saying,
“There is nothing I can do."
While the lost of earth are dying,
And the Master calls for you;
Take the task He gives you gladly;
Let His work your pleasure be;
Answer quickly when He calls you,
“Here am I, send me, send me."

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_the_voice_of_love_and_mercy.php

Hark! the voice of love and mercy
Sounds aloud from Calvary;
See, it rends the rocks asunder,
Shakes the earth, and veils the sky:
的t is finished!" 的t is finished!"
的t is finished!" Hear the dying Savior cry;
Hear the dying Savior cry.

的t is finished!" O what pleasure
Do these precious words afford;
Heav地ly blessings, without measure,
Flow to us from Christ the Lord:
的t is finished!" 的t is finished!"
的t is finished!" Saints the dying words record;
Saints the dying words record.

Finished all the types and shadows
Of the ceremonial law;
Finished all that God had promised;
Death and hell no more shall awe:
的t is finished!" 的t is finished!"
的t is finished!" Saints, from hence your comfort draw;
Saints, from hence your comfort draw.

Tune your harps anew, ye seraphs,
Join to sing the glorious theme;
All in earth, and all in heaven,
Join to praise Emmanuel痴 Name;
Alleluia! Alleluia!
Alleluia! Glory to the bleeding Lamb!
Glory to the bleeding Lamb!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_there_comes_a_whisper.php

Hark! there comes a whisper
Stealing on thine ear:
’Tis the Savior calling,
Soft, soft and clear.

Refrain

“Give thy heart to Me,
Once I died for thee";
Hark! Hark! thy Savior calls:
Come, sinner, come!

With that voice so gentle,
Dost thou hear Him say?
“Tell Me all thy sorrows;
Come, come away!"

Refrain

Wouldst thou find a refuge
For thy soul oppressed?
Jesus kindly answers,
“I am thy Rest."

Refrain

At the cross of Jesus,
Let thy burden fall;
While He gently whispers,
“I’ll bear it all."

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_tis_the_holy_temples_bell.php

Hark! ’tis the holy temple’s bell;
The voice that summons me to prayer:
My heart, each roving fancy quell;
Come, to the house of God repair.

There, while, in orison sublime,
Souls to the throne of God ascend,
Let no unhallowed child of time
Profane pollutions with them blend.

How for thy wants canst thou implore,
Crave for thy frailties pardon free,
Of praise the votive tribute pour,
Or bend, in thanks, the grateful knee,

If, from the awful King of kings,
Each bauble lures thy soul astray;
If to this dust of earth it clings,
And, fickle, flies from heaven away;

Pure as the blessed seraph’s vow,
O, let the sacred concert rise;
Intent with humble rapture bow,
Adore the Ruler of the skies.

Bid earthborn atoms all depart;
Within thyself collected, fall;
And give one day, rebellious heart,
Unsullied to the Lord of all!


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hark_the_gospel_news_is_sounding.php

Hark! the gospel news is sounding,
Christ has suffered on the tree;
Streams of mercy are abounding,
Grace for all is rich and free.
Now poor sinner, Now poor sinner,
Come to Him who died for thee.

O escape to yonder mountain!
Refuge find in Him today;
Christ invites you to the fountain,
Come and wash your sins away.
Do not tarry, Do not tarry,
Come to Jesus while you may.

Grace is flowing like a river,
Millions there have been supplied;
Still it flows as fresh as ever
From the Saviour's wounded side.
None need perish, None need perish,
All may live for Christ hath died.

Christ alone shall be our portion;
When we soon shall meet above,
Bathing in the boundless ocean
Of the great Redeemer's love;
All His fulness, All His fulness
We shall then forever prove.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/harvest_bells.php

O Christian! do not falter,
The harvest field is white,
And many souls are sinking
Into eternal night.

Refrain

The harvest bells are ringing,
We hear them night and day;
The harvest bells are pealing,
Go work, and watch, and pray;
The harvest bells are pealing,
Go work, watch, pray.

O reapers! quickly gather
The precious golden sheaves,
That day and night are falling
Like autumn’s withered leaves.

Refrain

So few we find the lab’rers,
The harvest, oh, how great!
Then slumber not, dear Christian,
For soon ’twill be too late.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/harvest_time.php

The harvest fields are bending
With precious ripened grain;
More reapers now are needed,
Ere Christ comes back again.

Refrain

Harvest time! Harvest time!
Precious Gospel seed is sown.
Reapers go! Reapers go!
Jesus, King, must have His own, His loved ones;
Soon He’ll come! Soon He’ll come!
Come and catch away His Bride, His own!
His own! His own!

The call must now be heeded,
We cannot say Him nay;
Since He has died to save them,
We must go forth today.

Refrain

We’ll come again rejoicing,
A reaper’s crown to gain;
The Harvest Home is coming,
When Christ comes back again.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hast_thou_not_known.php

Hast thou not known, hast thou not heard,
That firm remains on high
The everlasting throne of him
Who formed the sea and sky?

Art thou afraid his power shall fail
When comes thy evil day?
And can an all-creating arm
Grow weary or decay?

Supreme in wisdom as in power
The Rock of Ages stands;
Though him thou canst not see, nor trace
The working of his hands.

He gives the conquest to the weak,
Supports the fainting heart;
And courage in the evil hour
His heavenly aids impart.

Mere human power shall fast decay,
And youthful vigour cease;
But they who wait upon the Lord
In strength shall still increase.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/haste_traveler_haste.php

Haste, traveler, haste! the night comes on,
And many a shining hour is gone;
The storm is gathering in the west,
And thou art from home and rest.

O far from home thy footsteps stray;
Christ is the life, and Christ the way,
And Christ the light; thy setting sun
Sinks ere thy morning is begun.

Awake, awake! pursue thy way
With steady course, while yet ’tis day;
While thou art sleeping on the ground,
Danger and darkness gather round.

The rising tempest sweeps the sky;
The rains descend, the winds are high;
The waters swell, and death and fear
Beset thy path, nor refuge near.

O yes! a shelter you may gain,
A covert from the wind and the rain,
A hiding-place a rest, a home,
A refuge from the wrath to come.

Then linger not in all the plain,
Flee for thy life, the mountain gain;
Look not behind, make no delay,
O speed thee, speed thee on thy way!

Poor, lost, benighted soul! art thou
Wiling to find salvation now?
There yet is hope; hear mercy’s call:
Truth! Life! Light! Way! in Christ is all!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hasten_the_time_appointed.php

Hasten the time appointed,
By prophets long foretold
When all shall dwell together,
One Shepherd and one fold.
Let every idol perish,
To moles and bats be thrown
And every prayer be offered
To God in Christ alone.

Let Jew and Gentile, meeting
From many a distant shore
Around one altar kneeling,
One common Lord adore.
Let all that now divides us
Remove and pass away,
Like shadows of the morning
Before the blaze of day.

Let all that now unites us
More sweet and lasting prove
A closer bond of union,
In a blest land of love.
Let war be learned no longer,
Let strife and tumult cease,
All earth His blessèd kingdom
The Lord and Prince of Peace.

O long expected dawning,
Come with thy cheering ray!
When shall the morning brighten,
The shadows flee away?
O sweet anticipation!
It cheers the watchers on
To pray, and hope, and labor,
Till the dark night be gone.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hasten_today.php

There’s a heaven to gain,
There is torment to shun,
There are dangers in life to be braved;
There’s a foe to be fought,
And a prize to be won,
There are souls to be lost or be saved. 

Refrain:
Hasten today,
Will you longer delay,
While the Master, so loving and true,
Is bidding you go,
And someone in woe
Is longing and waiting for you? 

Go and labor today,
And no longer refuse;
Hear the call from the lips of your Lord;
Brother, sister, awake!
There is no time to lose,
For the millions now wait for His word. 

Brother, hasten today,
There is room for us all,
There is somewhere a soul you can win;
Will you longer delay?
Hear the pitiful call
Of the souls that are fettered in sin.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hasten_lord_the_glorious_time.php

Hasten, Lord, the glorious time
When, beneath Messiah’s sway,
Every nation, every clime,
Shall the Gospel call obey.
Mightiest kings His power shall own,
Heathen tribes His Name adore;
Satan and his host o’erthrown,
Bound in chains, shall hurt no more.

As when soft and gentle showers
Fall upon the thirsty plain,
Springing grass and blooming flowers,
Clothe the wilderness again;
So Thy Spirit shall descend,
Softening every stony heart,
And its sweetest influence lend,
All that’s lovely to impart.

Then shall wars and tumults cease,
Then be banished grief and pain,
Righteousness and joy and peace,
Undisturbed shall ever reign.
Bless we, then, our gracious Lord,
Ever praise His glorious Name;
All His mighty acts record;
All His wondrous love proclaim.

This hymn was origin­al­ly writ­ten in 4-line vers­es. With a tune of a 
dif­ferent me­ter, the omit­ted verse 6 can be used, as well:

Time shall sun and moon obscure,
Seas be dried, and rocks be riv’n.
But His reign shall still endure,
Endless as the days of Heav’n.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hasten_sinner_to_be_wise.php

Hasten, sinner, to be wise!
Stay not for the morrow’s sun:
Wisdom if you still despise,
Harder is it to be won.

Hasten, mercy, to implore!
Stay not for the morrow’s sun,
Lest thy season should be o’er,
Ere this evening’s stage be run.

Hasten, sinner, to return!
Stay not for the morrow’s sun,
Lest thy lamp should fail to burn
Ere salvation’s work is done.

Hasten, sinner, to be blest!
Stay not for the morrow’s sun,
Lest perdition thee arrest,
Ere the morrow is begun.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/have_compassion_lord_on_me.php

O my Savior, I am weary!
Let my cry to Thee ascend
While in humble supplication
Now before Thy throne I bend!
Refrain

Weak and helpless, yet believing,
Casting all my care on Thee,
I am hoping, trusting, praying;
Have compassion, Lord, on me!

O my Savior, tho’ unworthy,
I have nowhere else to go;
Thou canst pardon my transgressions,
Thou canst wash me white as snow!

Refrain

O my Savior, by Thy Spirit
Thou hast called me o’er and o’er;
Now repentant I am coming;
Lord, my wand’ring soul restore!

Refrain

O my Savior, do not leave me
Here to perish at Thy throne;
In Thy tender, loving mercy
Cleanse and make me all Thine own!

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/have_courage_to_say_no.php

You’re starting, my boy, on life’s journey,
Along the grand highway of life;
You’ll meet with a thousand temptations—
Each city with evil is rife.
This world is a stage of excitement,
There’s danger wherever you go;
But if you are tempted to weakness,
Have courage, my boy, to say No!

Refrain

Have courage, my boy, to say No!
Have courage, my boy, to say No!
Have courage, my boy,
Have courage, my boy,
Have courage, my boy, to say No!

In courage, my boy, lies your safety,
When you the long journey begin,
Your trust in a heavenly Father
Will keep you unspotted from sin.
Temptations will go on increasing,
As streams from a rivulet flow;
But if you’d be true to your manhood,
Have courage, my boy, to say No!

Refrain

Be careful in choosing companions,
Seek only the brave and the true,
And stand by your friends when in trial,
Ne’er changing the old for the new;
And when by false friends you are tempted
The taste of the wine cup to know,
With firmness, with patience and kindness,
Have courage, my boy, to say No!

Refrain



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/have_faith_in_god.php

Have faith in God when your pathway is lonely.
He sees and knows all the way you have trod;
Never alone are the least of His children;
Have faith in God, have faith in God.

Have faith in God when your prayers are unanswered,
Your earnest plea He will never forget;
Wait on the lord, trust His word and be patient,
Have faith in God. He'll answer yet.

Have faith in God in your pain and your sorrow,
His heart is touched with your grief and despair;
Cast all your cares and your burdens upon Him,
And leave them there, oh, leave them there.

Have faith in God though all else fall about you;
Have faith in God, He provides for His own:
He cannot fail though all kingdoms shall perish.
He rules. He reigns upon His throne.

Refrain: 

Have faith in God, He's on His throne,
Have faith in God, He watches over His own;
He cannot fail, He must prevail,
Have faith in God, Have faith in God.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/have_mercy_on_us_god_most_high.php

Have mercy on us, God most high,
Who lift our hearts to Thee;
Have mercy on us worms of earth,
Most holy Trinity.

Most ancient of all mysteries!
Before Thy throne we lie;
Have mercy now, most Merciful,
Most holy Trinity.

When heaven and earth were yet unmade,
When time was yet unknown,
Thou, in Thy bliss and majesty,
Didst live and love alone.

Thou wert not born; there was no fount
From which Thy Being flowed;
There is no end which Thou canst reach;
But Thou art simply God.

How wonderful creation is,
The work that Thou didst bless;
And oh, what then must Thou be like,
Eternal Loveliness!

How beautiful the angels are,
The saints how bright in bliss;
But with Thy beauty, Lord, compared,
How dull, how poor is this.

O listen, then, most pitiful,
To Thy poor creature’s heart:
It blesses Thee that Thou art God;
That Thou art what Thou art.

Most ancient of all mysteries!
Still at Thy throne we lie;
Have mercy now, most Merciful,
Most holy Trinity.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/have_mery_lord_on_me.php

Have mercy, Lord, on me,
As Thou wert ever kind;
Let me, oppressed with loads of guilt,
Thy wonted mercy find.

Wash off my foul offense,
And cleanse me from my sin;
For I confess my crimes, and see
How great my guilt has been.

The joy Thy favor gives
Let me again obtain,
And Thy free Spirit’s firm support
My fainting soul sustain.

To God the Father, Son,
And Spirit glory be,
As ’twas, and is, and shall be so
To all eternity.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/have_thine_own_way_lord.php

Have Thine own way, Lord! Have Thine own way!
Thou art the Potter, I am the clay.
Mold me and make me after Thy will,
While I am waiting, yielded and still.

Have Thine own way, Lord! Have Thine own way!
Search me and try me, Master, today!
Whiter than snow, Lord, wash me just now,
As in Thy presence humbly I bow.

Have Thine own way, Lord! Have Thine own way!
Wounded and weary, help me, I pray!
Power, all power, surely is Thine!
Touch me and heal me, Savior divine.

Have Thine own way, Lord! Have Thine own way!
Hold o’er my being absolute sway!
Fill with Thy Spirit ’till all shall see
Christ only, always, living in me.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/have_they_affections_been_nailed_to_the_cross.php

Have thy affections been nailed to the cross?
Is thy heart right with God?
Dost thou count all things for Jesus but loss?
Is thy heart right with God?

Refrain

Is thy heart right with God,
Washed in the crimson flood,
Cleansed and made holy, humble and lowly,
Right in the sight of God?

Hast thou dominion o’er self and o’er sin?
Is thy heart right with God?
Over all evil without and within?
Is thy heart right with God?

Refrain

Is there no more condemnation for sin?
Is thy heart right with God?
Does Jesus rule in the temple within?
Is thy heart right with God?

Refrain

Are all thy pow’rs under Jesus’ control?
Is thy heart right with God?
Does He each moment abide in thy soul?
Is thy heart right with God?

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/have_we_done_what_we_could.php

“She hath done what she could," said the kind, loving Savior,
When the ointment so precious was poured on His head;
By the hand of a sinner redeemed through His mercy,
Her contrition displayed by the tears that she shed. 

Refrain:
Are we bringing the gift of true love to the Savior?
Are we honoring Jesus so gentle and good?
Oh, how sweet it will be when our service is ended
If we hear His voice say, “Ye have done what ye could!" 

Have we done what we could in the white fields around us,
Where the ripe grain for reapers invitingly waits?
Have we done what we could leading souls out of darkness
Into light that is shining through heavenly gates? 

Have we done what we could in extending the Kingdom,
That in power and glory shall ever increase?
Have we done what we could filling earth with the homage
Of the Savior whose praises shall nevermore cease?

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/have_you_any_room_for_jesus.php

Have you any room for Jesus,
He who bore your load of sin?
As He knocks and asks admission,
Sinners, will you let Him in?

Refrain

Room for Jesus, King of Glory!
Hasten now His Word obey;
Swing the heart’s door widely open,
Bid Him enter while you may.

Room for pleasure, room for business,
But for Christ the Crucified,
Not a place that He can enter,
In the heart for which He died?

Refrain

Have you any room for Jesus,
As in grace He calls again?
O today is time accepted,
Tomorrow you may call in vain.

Refrain

Room and time now give to Jesus,
Soon will pass God’s day of grace;
Soon thy heart left cold and silent,
And thy Savior’s pleading cease.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/have_ye_been_to_nazareth.php

Have ye been to Nazareth,

Lowly, yet so fair?
Yes, we sought His humble town,
Found our Master there!
Did He dwell in palace fair,
Holding kingly sway?
Nay, we found a Carpenter,
Toiling day by day!

Refrain

In life’s Nazareth we seek,
Christ, the Master meek,
In our toil from day to day,
Find our Lord for aye!

Did ye find at Nazareth,
Christ the Son of God?
Yea, He was the Son of Man,
Earthly paths He trod.
Did ye find a blessing there
Ever to abide?
Yea, by Him the toilsome tasks
E’er are glorified.

Refrain

Is there light from Nazareth,
Daily life to crown?
Yes, the glory streams afar,
Distant years adown.
Will the Lord of Nazareth,
Friend and Comrade be?
All unseen He dwells with us,
As in Galilee!

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/have_ye_received_the_holy_spirit.php

Ye are the temples, Jesus hath spoken,
Temples of God’s holy Spirit divine;
Have ye received Him, bidden Him enter,
Make His abode in that poor heart of thine? 

Refrain:
Have ye received, since ye believed,
The blessed Holy Ghost?
He who has promised, gift of the Father,
Have ye received the Holy Ghost? 

He who has pardoned surely will cleanse thee,
All of the dross of thy nature refine;
Cleansed from all sin, His power will enter,
Fill you and thrill you with power divine. 

Showers of mercy, fullness of blessing,
Ever the Spirit’s indwelling attend;
’Tis this enduement, power of service,
Fruits for your labor He surely will send. 

Weary of wand’ring, come into Canaan,
Feast on the fullness and fat of the land;
Feed on the manna, dwell in the sunshine,
Led by His Spirit and kept by His hand. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/have_you_a_welcome.php

O blessed Jesus, for Thee we are waiting,
Waiting in joy for that glorious morning dawn;
Thou hast a remnant that love Thy appearing;
Welcome Thy coming, dear Lord, for Thine own. 

Refrain:
Have you a welcome down in your bosom,
For Christ to come this very day in final doom?
Yes, hallelujah! come, my Redeemer,
Even this moment, oh, come, Jesus, come. 

Lo, Thou art coming, the heavens betoken,
Foreboding wonders astonish eye and ear;
Omens now thunder the signs Thou hast spoken,
Truly, O Savior, Thy coming is near. 

Thrones have arisen and crumbled to ruin,
Since we await Thy returning from above;
Sinners emboldened say, “Where is His coming?"
Truth disbelieving, Thy wrath they must prove. 

Many ungrateful, despise and reject Thee,
Others professing by works deny Thee more;
But all the ransomed, Thy bride meek and holy,
Joyfully welcome Thy voice at the door.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/have_you_any_room_for_jesus.php

Have you any room for Jesus,
He who bore your load of sin?
As He knocks and asks admission,
Sinners, will you let Him in?

Refrain

Room for Jesus, King of Glory!
Hasten now His Word obey;
Swing the heart’s door widely open,
Bid Him enter while you may.

Room for pleasure, room for business,
But for Christ the Crucified,
Not a place that He can enter,
In the heart for which He died?

Refrain

Have you any room for Jesus,
As in grace He calls again?
O today is time accepted,
Tomorrow you may call in vain.

Refrain

Room and time now give to Jesus,
Soon will pass God’s day of grace;
Soon thy heart left cold and silent,
And thy Savior’s pleading cease.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/have_you_any_time_for_jesus.php

Have you any time for Jesus,
While the fleeting moments roll?
Is this mortal life so busy
That you cannot save you soul? 

Refrain:
Soon the summons from the portals
Of the mansions in the sky
May be sounding your departure;
You must then take time to die. 

Have you any time for Jesus?
Can it be, life’s journey through,
That you have no time to serve Him
Who has spent His life for you? 

Time for business, time for pleasure,
Time to revel on in sin—
Will you not take time for Jesus?
Oh, invite Him to come in. 

If you have no time for Jesus
Ere you pass beyond the blue,
In the resurrection morning
He will have no time for you. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/have_you_been_to_jesus.php

Have you been to Jesus for the cleansing power?
Are you washed in the blood of the Lamb?
Are you fully trusting in His grace this hour?
Are you washed in the blood of the Lamb?

Refrain

Are you washed in the blood,
In the soul cleansing blood of the Lamb?
Are your garments spotless? Are they white as snow?
Are you washed in the blood of the Lamb?

Are you walking daily by the Savior’s side?
Are you washed in the blood of the Lamb?
Do you rest each moment in the Crucified?
Are you washed in the blood of the Lamb?

Refrain

When the Bridegroom cometh will your robes be white?
Are you washed in the blood of the Lamb?
Will your soul be ready for the mansions bright,
And be washed in the blood of the Lamb?

Refrain

Lay aside the garments that are stained with sin,
And be washed in the blood of the Lamb;
There’s a fountain flowing for the soul unclean,
O be washed in the blood of the Lamb!

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/have_you_ever_heard.php

Have you ever heard a duck praise the Lord?
A duck praise the Lord, a duck praise the Lord
Have you ever heard a duck praise the Lord?
This is what he says...

Quack quack quack quack quack quack
quack quack quack
quack quack quack praise the Lord


2. kitten (meow)
3. Fish (blub)
4. Bell (ding)
5. All (ding, blub, meow, quack)

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/have_you_ever_heard_the_story.php

Have you ever heard the story
Of the Babe of Bethlehem,
Who was worshipped by the angels
And the wise and holy men?
How He taught the learnèd doctors
In the temple far away?
O I’m glad, so glad, to tell you,
He is just the same today!

Refrain

He is just the same today,
He is just the same today,
Seeking those who are astray,
And saving souls along the way.
O I’m glad, so glad, to tell you,
He is just the same today.

Have you ever heard the story
How He walked upon the sea,
To His dear disciples tossing
On the waves of Galilee?
How the waves in angry motion
Quickly did His will obey?
O I’m glad, so glad, to tell you
He is just the same today!

Refrain

Have you ever heard of Jesus
Praying in Gethsemane,
And the ever thrilling story,
How He died upon the tree,
Cruel thorns His forehead piercing,
As His Spirit passed away?
This He did for you, my brother,
And He’s just the same today!

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/have_you_ever_tried_to_bear_your_burdens.php

Have you ever tried to bear your burdens
All alone? All alone?
Don’t you know there’s One Who waits to help you,
Who will make all your burdens His own?

Refrain

When I have burdens to bear which no one can share,
I take them to Jesus, the Man of Calvary;
When I have crosses to bear, my Savior is there,
And always takes the heavy end, and gives the light to me.

Don’t you know He trod the winepress for you?
All alone? All alone?
And the burden that He bore in meekness,
Such a burden no other has known.

Refrain

Don’t you know that He has bought your pardon
All alone? All alone?
And your gratitude for such a mercy
Unto Jesus you never have shown.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/have_you_on_the_lord_believed.php

Have you on the Lord believed?
Still there’s more to follow.
Of His grace have you received?
Still there’s more to follow.
Oh, the grace the Father shows!
Still there’s more to follow.
Freely He His grace bestows,
Still there’s more to follow.

Refrain

More and more, more and more,
Always more to follow,
Oh, his matchless, boundless love!
Still there’s more to follow.

Have you felt the Savior near?
Still there’s more to follow.
Does His blessèd presence cheer?
Still there’s more to follow.
Oh the love that Jesus shows;
Still there’s more to follow.
Freely He His love bestows,
Still there’s more to follow.

Refrain

Have you felt the Spirit’s power?
Still there’s more to follow.
Falling like the gentle shower?
Still there’s more to follow.
Oh, the power the Spirit shows,
Still there’s more to follow.
Freely He His power bestows,
Still there’s more to follow.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/have_you_prayed_it_through.php

Have you prayed all night, till the break of day,
And the morning light drove the dark away?
Did you linger there, till the morning dew,
In prevailing prayer, did you pray it through?

Refrain

Did you pray till the answer came,
Did you plead in the Savior’s Name?
Have you prayed all night till the morning light,
Did you pray till the answer came?

Did you pray it through, till the answer came?
There’s a promise true for your faith to claim,
At the place of prayer, Jesus waits for you,
Did you meet Him there, did you pray it through?

Refrain

As the Master prayed in the garden lone,
Let your prayer be made to the Father’s throne,
If you seek His will, He will answer you,
Are you trusting still, have you prayed it through?

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/have_you_read_the_story_of_the_cross.php

Have you read the story of the cross,
Where Jesus bled and died,
Where your debt was paid by the precious blood
That flowed from His wounded side?

Refrain

He died of a broken heart for you,
He died of a broken heart;
Oh, wondrous love! for you, for me,
He died of a broken heart.

Have you read how they placed the crown of thorns
Upon His kingly brow,
How He cried, “They know not what they do;
O Father, forgive them now"?

Refrain

Have you read how the dying thief was saved
While hanging on the tree,
When he looked with pleading eyes and said,
“O Lord, remember me"?

Refrain

Have you read how in anguish He cried aloud
And died on Calvary?
Have you ever said, “I thank Thee, Lord,
For giving Thy life for me"?

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_abides.php

I’m rejoicing night and day
As I walk the narrow way,
For the hand of God in all my life I see.
And the reason of my bliss,
Yes, the secret all is this:
That the Comforter abides with me.

Refrain

He abides, He abides.
Hallelujah, He abides with me!
I’m rejoicing night and day
As I walk the narrow way,
For the Comforter abides with me.

Once my heart was full of sin,
Once I had no peace within,
Till I heard how Jesus died upon the tree.
Then I fell down at His feet,
And there came a peace so sweet.
Now the Comforter abides with me.

Refrain

He is with me everywhere,
And He knows my ev’ry care;
I’m as happy as a bird and just as free.
For the Spirit has control;
Jesus satisfies my soul,
Since the Comforter abides with me.

Refrain

There’s no thirsting for the things
Of the world—they’ve taken wings.
Long ago I gave them up, and instantly
All my night was turned to day,
All my burdens rolled away.
Now the Comforter abides with me.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_answered_never_a_word.php

A friendless pris’ner at Pilate’s bar,
’Mid the raging mob He stood;
Like wolves that had scented His blood from afar
And eagerly Him pursued;
The voice of these murd’rers was heard as they cried,
Till Jerusalem’s city was stirred;
“Away with Him, let Him be crucified";
But He answered never a word. 

The priests and the elders with fiendish spite,
Accused Him of many things;
But His face was radiant with heavenly light,
He could hear the sound of wings;
And Pilate marveled to see Him there,
As each wicked charge he heard,
His mute lips moved as in silent prayer,
But He answered never a word. 

With fiercest hatred his foes pressed on,
To kill Him their greatest desire;
The faith of His foll’wers was almost gone,
Must the last faint spark expire?
Will He meekly yield in His dreadful hour,
When a murderer is preferred?
He who raised the dead, has He lost His pow’r?
But He answered never a word. 

Then they brought the cross that Barabbas should fill,
He, a murderer, now to go free;
And they laid in on Jesus to bear up the hill,
To purchase salvation for me;
Though hungry and thirsty, and bleeding and cold,
Not a sigh passed His lips that was heard;
He trembled a moment, then sank to the ground,
But He answered never a word. 

The rabble with spite and revenge urged them on,
Till He came to Calvary’s brow,
Where they nailed His hands and His feet to the cross—
O sinner, look on him now!
Then raising the cross, oh, what suff’ring and pain!
Till the earth and the heavens were stirred,
But the suffering Jesus with meekness endured,
But He answered never a word. 

But there hung by His side a thief, broken and sad,
With sins that were all his own,
And he cried, “Dear Lord, remember me
When Thou sittest on Thy throne";
And the Savior turned and looked upon him,
His compassion deep was stirred;
And peace, sweet peace He shed o’er that soul—
He could answer him with a word. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_arose.php

“He is risen," said the angel to the women,
When they came to see Him sleeping in the cave;
Jesus burst the mighty bars of death asunder,
And arose to reign triumphant from the grave. 

Refrain:
He arose, my Savior,
He arose, my Savior,
He arose, my Savior,
Triumphant from the grave. 

He is risen, surely death is now abolished:
Grave, where is thy vict’ry? Death, where is thy sting?
Jesus flashes light into the darkened valley;
Swell the mighty chorus, men and angels sing. 

He is risen, let the nations hear the music,
Let the gospel truth reach every distant plain;
Let the tidings roll that every guilty captive
May be fully free and help to praise His name. 

He is risen, hence the fear of that grim monster
Is forever banished to the shades of night;
And the grave and death have lost their wretched terror
While we live on earth or take our upward flight. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_became_incarnate.php

Prelude

He became incarnate, Christ the King of glory,
He became incarnate

Shepherds were keeping their nightly watch on Bethlem’s plain,
“Fear not, O brothers," the angel addressed them,
Wonderful brightness around them shone so marv’lously.
“Joy I proclaim through the birth of the Savior."

Refrain

He became incarnate, Christ the King of glory,
He became incarnate

“This sign I’ll show you by which you’ll find the Lord of all."
Suddenly heavenly hosts sang forth praises.
“In David’s city you’ll find Him in a lowly stall."
“Glory to God Who gives peace on earth good will."

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_bore_it_all1.php

My precious Savior suffered pain and agony
He bore it all (Freely bore it all)
That I might live (I with Him might live)
He broke the bonds of sin and set the captive free
He bore it all (all) that (that) I (I) might (might) live (in His presence live)

Chorus:
He bore it all (Jesus bore it all) that I might see His shining face (see His 
Shining face)
He bore it all (Freely bore it all)
That I might live (I with Him might live)
I stood condemned to die (stood condemned to die) but Jesus took my place 
(freely took my place)
He bore it all (all) that (that) I (I) might (might) live (in His presence live)

Up Calvary's hill in shame the blessed Savior trod
He bore it all (Freely bore it all)
That I might live (I with Him might live)
Between two thieves they crucified the Son of God
He bore it all (all) that (that) I (I) might (might) live (in His presence live)

Repeat Chorus

He bore it all (all) that (that) I (I) might (might) live (in His presence live)

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_brought_me.php

He brought me to His banqueting table
And his banner over me is love (3)
His banner over me is love
1. He lifts me up to heavenly places
2. I am safe and secure in the rock of all ages
3. He is the way, the truth and the life
4. In Christ there is no condemnation
5. I am my beloved's and He is mine
6. He placed my feet on firm foundation
7. And now I am living in the new creation
8. I am seated with Him in the heavenly places. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_brought_me_out.php

My heart was distressed 地eath Jehovah痴 dread frown,
And low in the pit where my sins dragged me down;
I cried to the Lord from the deep miry clay,
Who tenderly brought me out to golden day.

Refrain

He brought me out of the miry clay,
He set my feet on the Rock to stay;
He puts a song in my soul today,
A song of praise, hallelujah!

He placed me upon the strong Rock by His side,
My steps were established and here I値l abide;
No danger of falling while here I remain,
But stand by His grace until the crown I gain.

Refrain

He gave me a song, 稚was a new song of praise;
By day and by night its sweet notes I will raise;
My heart痴 overflowing, I知 happy and free.
I値l praise my Redeemer, Who has rescued me.

Refrain

I値l sing of His wonderful mercy to me,
I値l praise Him till all men His goodness shall see;
I値l sing of salvation at home and abroad,
Till many shall hear the truth and trust in God.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_calls_me_his_child.php

I’m a tree I can bend
When the storm comes rushing in
I’m strong my roots run deep
But when problems come along
There’s just a part of me that forgets all He's done
He never does, He never does

Chorus:
He never gives up on the weary
He never gives up on the weak
And every time I’ve fallen down
He lifts me to my feet (lifts me to my feet)
In your eyes I’m a hopeless case
But that is just because
You may have all but given up
He never does, He never does

He forgives and forgets
Puts my sins as far as east is
From the west
And then hopes for the best
There’s just a part of me that doubts that great a love
He never does, He never does

Repeat Chorus

Bridge:
And when I feel like hope is gone
His precious mercy comes along
And though I don’t deserve His grace and His love
He calls me his child just because, just because

Repeat Chorus

He never will, He’ll never give up on me
He never does, no, He never does
I’m His child and forever I’ll be
He never does
Some folks may give up on you
But He never will

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_can_turn_the_tides.php

1. He can turn the tides
And calm the angry sea.
He alone decides
Who writes a symphony.
He lights ev'ry star
That makes our darkness bright.
He keeps watch all through
Each long and lonely night.
He still finds the time
To hear a child's first prayer.
Saint or sinner call
And always find Him there. 

Refrain:
Though it makes him sad
To see the way we live,
He'll always say, "I forgive." 

2. He can grant a wish
Or make a dream come true.
He can paint the clouds
And turn the gray to blue.
He alone knows where
To find the rainbow's end.
He alone can see
What lies beyond the bend.
He can touch a tree
And turn the leaves to gold.
He knows every lie
That you and I have told.
Refrain: 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_careth_for_me.php

Jesus, my Savior, is precious to me,
He careth for me;
Loving and keeping me happy and free,
He careth for me.

Refrain

He careth for me, He careth for me,
He loves and He keeps me,
I’m happy and free.
He careth for me, He careth for me,
He loves and He keeps me,
He careth for me.

Tho’ storms and tempests may break o’er my soul,
He careth for me;
Safely I’m kept under Jesus’ control,
He careth for me.

Refrain

When I am tempted and wander astray,
He careth for me;
When I grow weary and faint by the way,
He careth for me.

Refrain

Tho’ my path leads me where dangers betide,
He careth for me;
Still He is with me, my Shield and my Guide,
He careth for me.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_comes.php

He comes! He comes with trumpet sound,
To wake the slumb’ring nations ’round;
His pard’ning love no more is found—
He comes! He comes!
The dead in Christ shall then arise,
To meet their Savior in the skies,
No more a bleeding sacrifice—
He comes! He comes! 

He comes no more in priestly dress;
Each eye shall see, each tongue confess;
To judge the world in righteousness
He comes! He comes!
The earth shall melt, the mountains quake,
The sea shall roar, the heavens shake,
The trumpet sounds, the dead awake—
He comes! He comes! 

Dear sinners, what will be your fate?
The cry will be, “Too late, too late!
To enter in at heaven’s gate!"
He comes! He comes!
“Let rocks and mountains on us fall,"
In vain at mercy’s door they call;
Now doomed to swift destruction all—
He comes! He comes! 

His loved, His own all hear His voice,
Obey His call, in Him rejoice;
The way of life has been their choice;
He comes! He comes!
Now to those mansions fair and bright
They take their everlasting flight;
There they shall walk with Him in white—
He comes! He comes! 

Behold, what wonder greets mine eye—
Ten thousand angels in the sky!
The end has come, destruction’s nigh,
He comes! He comes!
Oh, fearful scene! creation groans,
While loud above the trumpet tones
What peals of joy! What piercing moans!
He comes! He comes! 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_comes_to_us_as_one_unknown.php

He comes to us as one unknown,
a breath unseen, unheard;
as though within a heart of stone,
or shriveled seed in darkness sown,
a pulse of being stirred.

He comes when souls in silence lie
and thoughts of day depart,
half-seen upon the inward eye,
a falling star across the sky
of night within the heart.

He comes to us in sound of seas,
the ocean's fume and foam;
yet small and still upon the breeze,
a wind that stirs the tops of trees,
a voice to call us home.

He comes in love as once he came
by flesh and blood and birth;
to bear within our mortal frame
a life, a death, a saving name
for every child of earth.

He comes in truth when faith is grown;
believed, obeyed, adored:
the Christ in all the scriptures shown,
as yet unseen, but not unknown,
our Savior, and our Lord.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_comes_he_comes_the_judge_severe.php

He comes! He comes! the Judge severe!
The seventh trumpet speaks Him near;
His lightnings flash, His thunders roll;
How welcome to the faithful soul!

From Heav’n angelic voices sound;
See the almighty Jesus crowned,
Girt with omnipotence and grace!
And glory decks the Savior’s face.

Descending on His great white throne,
He claims the kingdoms for His own;
The kingdoms all obey His Word,
And hail Him their triumphant Lord.

Shout, all the people of the sky,
And all the saints of the Most High;
Our Lord, Who now His right obtains,
Forever and forever reigns.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_cometh.php

Jesus is coming! go, herald the tidings
Far over the land and the sea;
Jesus is coming to gather the ransomed,
Redeemed by His death on the tree.
Angels attending, the heavens descending—
All language our joy will transcend,
When we shall see Him, the King in His beauty,
Our Bridegroom, Redeemer, and Friend.

Refrain

Jesus is coming, our Savior and Lover divine;
Soon in His glory the ransomed of ages will shine;
Ages on ages we’ll reign with our King on His throne;
Wonderful story! We’ll share in His glory,
Redeemed by His mercy divine.

Lift up your heads and rejoice, O ye righteous,
Your perfect redemption is nigh;
Swiftly the darkness of midnight approaches,
“He cometh" shall sound from the sky.
Long has the battle been waged against evil
By suffering saints here below.
Jesus is coming to banish our sorrow,
And lead us where tears never flow.

Refrain

Come, dear Lord Jesus, Thy promise fulfilling;
“Come quickly!" our souls cry to Thee:
Long has the world been enthralled by the tempter,
The curse is on land and on sea.
Yet Thou shalt triumph, the nations subduing,
The truth of the Word cannot fail;
God’s wondrous glory, like ocean’s deep billows,
To earth’s farthest bounds shall prevail.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_did_it_again.php

Chorus:
He did it again
He did it again
He showed the death-defying
Faith-reyling wonder of his might
Remember the miracle
Brought from his hand
Still see him working in this land
He did it again

Remember when Moses told the Pharaoh
He should let the people go
And if he would not cooperate
The power he would show
Sadly Pharaoh's heart was hardened
And to Moses he declined
To obey the Lord's commandments
He just would not change his mind

One by one the Lord sent down the plagues
Upon Egyptian land
Showed his mighty awesome power
Just to help them understand
That Jehovah is the true God
And there is no other way
He'll deliver us from bondage
He can part the sea today

Repeat Chorus

Remember when God had told Elijah
He'd send rain upon the land
That was famished from a famine
That they long could not withstand
Well, he called upon the prophets
Of a heathen god named Ball
To arrange a simple contest
And to let the prophets wail

So, from the morning 'til the evning
All the prophets of that god
Were distraught for lack of action
(a divinity facade!)
Yet Elijah called Jehovah 
To bring fire down and then
He released his might from heaven
Showed his power once again

Repeat Chorus

Now our God is alive and well
Overcoming the powers of Hell
If you pray and believe it's true
There's no doubt what our God will do

Repeat Chorus

Still see him working in the land
He did it again
He did it again
Again! 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_did_not_die_in_vain.php

My blessèd Lord was crucified,
The day was dark, and grief was wide,
For hope was crushed and all seemed vain,
Until that Savior rose again.

Refrain

Ring out the blessèd news again!
Oh! bear aloft the strain;
The mighty Lord is ris’n in power,
He died, but not in vain!

He brings His great salvation nigh,
And on His love bids us rely;
He bought our peace through grief and pain;
But oh! He did not die in vain!

Refrain

O, wondrous news of life and love!
That Jesus lives and reigns above!
He made the path to glory plain;
Ah, no! He did not die in vain.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_didnt_bring_us_this_far_to_leave_us.php

Chorus 1:
He didn't bring us this far to leave us
He didn't teach us to swim to let us drown
He didn't build His home in us to move away
He didn't lift us up to let us down

There are some promises in a letter
Written a long, long time ago
They're not getting older, they're getting better
Because He still wants us to know

Chorus 2:
He didn't bring us this far to leave us
He didn't teach us to swim to let us drown
He didn't build His home in us to move away
He didn't lift us up to let us down (to let us down, let us down)
He didn't lift us up to let us down

I read those promises in His letter
And now I claim them for my own
Filling my heart and making life better
And I just wanted you to know

Repeat Chorus 2

Never use the word defeat
Claim His promises, every one of them
And every spoken word He'll hear
Because we're everything to Him

Repeat Chorus 2

He didn't lift us up to let us down


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_died_for_me.php

I saw One hanging on a tree,
In agony and blood;
He fixed His languid eyes on me,
As near His cross I stood.

Oh, can it be, upon a tree
The Savior died for me?
My soul is thrilled,
My heart is filled,
To think He died for me!

Sure, never, till my latest breath,
Can I forget that look:
It seemed to charge me with His death,
Tho' not a word He spoke.

Oh, can it be, upon a tree
The Savior died for me?
My soul is thrilled,
My heart is filled,
To think He died for me!

My conscience felt and owned the guilt,
And plunged me in despair;
I saw my sins His blood had spilt
And helped to nail Him there.

Oh, can it be, upon a tree
The Savior died for me?
My soul is thrilled,
My heart is filled,
To think He died for me!

Alas! I know not what I did,
But now my tears are vain:
Where shall my trembling soul be hid?
For I the Lord have slain.

Oh, can it be, upon a tree
The Savior died for me?
My soul is thrilled,
My heart is filled,
To think He died for me!

A second look He gave, which said,
"I freely all forgive:
This blood is for thy ransom paid,
I die that thou may'st live."

Oh, can it be, upon a tree
The Savior died for me?
My soul is thrilled,
My heart is filled,
To think He died for me!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_dies_the_friend_of_sinners_dies.php

He dies! the Friend of sinners dies!
Lo! Salem’s daughters weep around;
A solemn darkness veils the skies,
A sudden trembling shakes the ground.

Come, saints, and drop a tear or two
For Him who groaned beneath your load:
He shed a thousand drops for you,
A thousand drops of richer blood.

Here’s love and grief beyond degree:
The Lord of Glory dies for men!
But lo! what sudden joys we see,
Jesus, the dead, revives again!

The rising God forsakes the tomb;
The tomb in vain forbids His rise;
Cherubic legions guard Him home,
And shout Him welcome to the skies.

Break off your fears, ye saints, and tell
How high your great Deliv’rer reigns;
Sing how He spoiled the hosts of hell,
And led the monster death in chains!

Say, “Live forever, wondrous King!
Born to redeem, and strong to save;"
Then ask the monster, “Where’s thy sting?"
And, “Where’s thy vict’ry, boasting grave?"




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_expecteth.php

He expecteth, He expecteth!
Down the stream of time,
Still the words come softly ringing,
Like a chime.

Oft times faint, now waxing louder
As the hour draws near,
When the King in all His glory,
Shall appear.

He is waiting with long patience
For His crowning day,
For that kingdom which shall never
Pass away.

And till ev’ry tribe and nation
Bow before His throne,
He expecteth loyal service
From His own.

He expecteth—but He heareth
Still the bitter cry
From earth’s millions, “Come and help us,
For we die."

He expecteth—doth He see us
Busy here and there,
Heedless of those pleading accents
Of despair?

Shall we—dare we disappoint Him?
Brethren, let us rise!
He Who died for us is watching
From the skies.

Watching till His royal banner
Floateth far and wide,
Till He seeth of His travail
Satisfied!
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_feedeth_his_flock.php

He feedeth His flock like a shepherd,
And tenderly guideth their way;
His banner of mercy is o’er them,
Their refuge by night and by day.

Refrain

O wonderful Savior,
Precious Redeemer and Friend;
He loveth the faithful that trust Him,
And loveth them unto the end.

He never will leave nor forsake them,
His own He hath promised to keep;
So great was His love and compassion,
He laid down His life for the sheep.

Refrain

He feedeth His flock like a shepherd,
And makes them in Him to rejoice;
They walk in the light of His presence,
And know the glad sound of His voice.

Refrain

He feedeth His flock like a shepherd,
And oh, ’twill be rapture untold,
When all shall be gathered together,
At home in the dear upper fold.

Refrain
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_gave_her_water.php

Chorus:
Oh Jesus, he gave her water
You know my Jesus gave her water
Oh Jesus gave her water
And it was not from the well

Well, there was a woman from Samaria
She came to the well to get some water
It was there she met a stranger
And he did her story tell
She left my savior singing
She came back to him bringing
The time she had water
And it was not from the well

Repeat Chorus

Well on that woman he had pity
She ran back to the city
Crying glory hallelujah
I'm gonna let his praises swell
Every time she'd doubt him
She's stop and think about him
The man that gave her that living water
And it was not from the well

Oh, gave her water
Jesus gave her water
Oh Jesus he gave her water
I'm gonna let his praises swell
Jesus gave that woman water
He gave her that living lasting water
Oh, and it was not from the well
(Repeat)https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_gave_me_a_song.php

He took my burdens all away, up to a brighter day
He gave me a song (He gave me a song), a wonderful song (a wonderful song)
A wonderful song I now can sing, in my heart joybells ring
He gave me a song (He gave me a song), a wonderful song (a wonderful song)

Chorus:
He gave me a song (He gave me a song), to sing about (to sing about)
He lifted me (He lifted me) from sin and doubt (from sin and doubt)
O, praise His name (O praise His name), He is my King (He is my King)
A wonderful song (a wonderful song) He is to me (He is to me)

I am redeemed no more to die, never to say goodbye
He gave me a song (He gave me a song), a wonderful song (a wonderful song)
And some of these days in that fair land, sing with the chorus grand
He gave me a song (He gave me a song), a wonderful song (a wonderful song)

Repeat Chorus (x2)

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_gives_me_the_power.php

Jesus came to earth by a lowly birth,
Gave Himself as an offering of matchless worth;
To His own He came in His Father’s Name,
But they scorned to receive Him their King.

Refrain

But as many as received Him to them He gave the power
The power to become the sons of God;
But as many as received Him to them He gave the power
To become the sons of God.

Grace and pardon free, all for you and me,
Every one who receives Him a son may be;
For His blood He spilt to remove our guilt,
When He offered Himself once for all.

Refrain

Not by works we come as the Father’s son,
To receive as a welcome the words “well done";
Lest we fain would boast as a mighty host,
Knowing not ’tis the free gift of God.

Refrain
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_gives_victory_to_all.php

Chorus:
You give the victory to all (You give the victory to all)
You give the victory to all
Save me from my enemies and troubles great and small
You give the victory to all (You give the victory to all) 

Your love is all I need to live (Your love is all I need to live)
Your love is all I need to live
Lead me to the victory that only You can give
Your love is all I need to live (Your love is all I need to live) 

Your home is where I want to be (Your home is where I want to be)
Your home is where I want to be
I will not be satisfied until your face I see
Your home is where I want to be (Your home is where I want to be) 

Repeat Chorus (x3) 

You give the victory to all (Oh, You give the victory to all)
You give the victory to all (Oh, You give the victory to all)
You give the victory to all (Oh, You give the victory to all)
You give the victory to all 
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_giveth_his_beloved_sleep.php

Sorrow and care may meet,
The tempest cloud may low’r,
The surge of sin may beat
Upon earth’s troubled shore;
God doth His own in safety keep,
He giveth His belovèd sleep,
He giveth His belovèd sleep.

The din of war may roll,
With all her raging flight,
Grief may oppress the soul,
Throughout the weary nigh;
God doth His own in safety keep,
He giveth His belovèd sleep,
He giveth His belovèd sleep.

In childhood’s winsome page,
In manhood’s joyous bloom,
In feebleness and age,
In death’s dark gathering gloom,
God will His own in safety keep,
He giveth His belovèd sleep,
He giveth His belovèd sleep.


 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_giveth_more_grace.php

He giveth more grace as our burdens grow greater,
He sendeth more strength as our labors increase;
To added afflictions He addeth His mercy,
To multiplied trials He multiplies peace. 

When we have exhausted our store of endurance,
When our strength has failed ere the day is half done,
When we reach the end of our hoarded resources
Our Father’s full giving is only begun. 

His love has no limits, His grace has no measure,
His power no boundary known unto men;
For out of His infinite riches in Jesus
He giveth, and giveth, and giveth again. https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_had_everything.php

Chorus:
He had everything (everything he wanted) (yes he had it all), everything that he 
dreamed (that he dreamed) (all he dreamed)
He had everything (everything he wanted) (yes he had it all), all he wanted it 
seemed (that he wanted) (all it seemed)
But the more he had and the more he learned
There was something not there
To fill the void within him, Oh where - Oh where 

Everything he gathered he had made by himself
Or so he always had believed
Self-reliant living always brought him success
Just consider all he had achieved
But the clock was running out on going his way
Placing all his hopes upon his wealth
Sooner than later he would come face to face
No man can live unto himself (unto himself) 

Repeat Chorus 

Everything he touched it seemed would turn into gold
Or at least it always did appear
As his heart was slowing down and growing so cold
Finding satisfaction no where near
Then his body lost its way, began to shut down
Leaving him with nothing to control
Abruptly showing him with nothing to live for
And now nothing within his soul (in his soul) 

Repeat Chorus 

(Everything he wanted, that he dreamed) 

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_has_come_the_christ_of_god.php

He has come, the Christ of God:
Left for us His glad abode;
Stooping from His throne of bliss
To this darksome wilderness.

He has come, the Prince of Peace:
Come to bid our sorrows cease;
Come to scatter with His light
All the shadows of our night.

He, the mighty King, has come,
Making this poor earth His home:
Come to bear our sin’s sad load,
Son of David, Son of God.

He has come, Whose Name of grace
Speaks deliverance to our race:
Left for us His glad abode,
Son of Mary, Son of God.

Unto us a Child is born:
Ne’er has earth beheld a morn
Among all the morns of time,
Half so glorious in its prime.

Unto us a Son is given:
He has come from God’s own Heaven,
Bringing with Him from above
Holy peace and holy love.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_hideth_my_soul.php

A wonderful Savior is Jesus my Lord,
A wonderful Savior to me;
He hideth my soul in the cleft of the rock,
Where rivers of pleasure I see.

Refrain

He hideth my soul in the cleft of the rock
That shadows a dry, thirsty land;
He hideth my life with the depths of His love,
And covers me there with His hand,
And covers me there with His hand.

A wonderful Savior is Jesus my Lord,
He taketh my burden away;
He holdeth me up, and I shall not be moved,
He giveth me strength as my day.

Refrain

With numberless blessings each moment He crowns,
And filled with His fullness divine,
I sing in my rapture, oh, glory to God
For such a Redeemer as mine!

Refrain

When clothed in His brightness, transported I rise
To meet Him in clouds of the sky,
His perfect salvation, His wonderful love
I’ll shout with the millions on high.

Refrain
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_included_me.php

I am so happy in Christ today,
That I go singing along my way;
Yes, I’m so happy to know and say,
“Jesus included me, too."

Refrain

Jesus included me, yes, He included me,
When the Lord said, “Whosoever," He included me;
Jesus included me, yes, He included me,
When the Lord said, “Whosoever," He included me.

Gladly I read, “Whosoever may
Come to the fountain of life today";
But when I read it I always say,
“Jesus included me, too."

Refrain

Ever God’s Spirit is saying, “Come!"
Hear the Bride saying, “No longer roam";
But I am sure while they’re calling home,
Jesus included me, too.

Refrain

“Freely come drink," words the soul to thrill!
O with what joy they my heart do fill!
For when He said, “Whosoever will,"
Jesus included me, too.

Refrain
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_is_able_to_deliver.php



He is able to deliver thee, O sinner;
He will drive the night away;
He’s the star of perfect day;
He will shine from heaven in thy heart forever. 

Refrain:
He is able, He is able
To deliver thee. 

He is able to deliver thee, O sinner;
See the myriad worlds above,
And the one on which we move—
They were made by our eternal God of power. 

He is able to deliver thee, O sinner;
See your life is in His hand,
Thus you live at His command;
He’s the source of good, the ever blessed Giver. 

He is able to deliver thee, O sinner;
He has quenched the fire of yore,
Stopped the lion’s rage and roar,
He has raised the dead and healed the spotted leper. 

He is able to deliver thee, O sinner;
For He told the king His dream,
Stopped the Jordan’s flowing stream;
Healed the lame, the blind, the palsy—what a Savior!


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_is_able_to_deliver_thee.php



’Tis the grandest theme through the ages rung;
’Tis the grandest theme for a mortal tongue;
’Tis the grandest theme that the world e’er sung,
“Our God is able to deliver thee."

Refrain

He is able to deliver thee,
He is able to deliver thee;
Though by sin oppressed, go to Him for rest;
“Our God is able to deliver thee."

’Tis the grandest theme in the earth or main;
’Tis the grandest theme for a mortal strain;
’Tis the grandest theme, tell the world again,
“Our God is able to deliver thee."

Refrain

’Tis the grandest theme, let the tidings roll,
To the guilty heart, to the sinful soul;
Look to God in faith, He will make thee whole,
“Our God is able to deliver thee."

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_is_all_and_all_to_me.php

There is constant joy abiding

In Christ my Lord and King;
Of His love that passeth knowledge
My heart and tongue shall sing.

Refrain

He is all in all to me,
And my song of songs shall be,
Hallelujah, O my Savior,
I am trusting only Thee.

When my path is veiled in shadows,
And clouds above me roll,
I can smile amid the tempest,
His glory fills my soul.

Refrain

I can see his bow of promise
Through tears and trials deep;
I can hear His voice like music,
That lulls my care to sleep.

Refrain

I shall yet behold and praise Him,
And dwell in perfect peace
In the golden land of beauty,
Where cloud and wave shall cease.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_is_born.php

Refrain

He is born, the holy Child,
Play the oboe and bagpipes merrily!
He is born, the holy Child,
Sing we all of the Savior mild.

Through long ages of the past,
Prophets have foretold His coming;
Through long ages of the past,
Now the time has come at last!

Refrain

O how lovely, O how pure
Is this perfect Child of heaven;
O how lovely, O how pure
Gracious gift to humankind!

Refrain

Jesus, Lord of all the world,
Coming as a Child among us,
Jesus, Lord of all the world,
Grant to us Thy heavenly peace.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_is_coming.php

He is coming, the “Man of Sorrows,"
Now exalted on high;
He is coming with loud hosannas,
In the clouds of the sky.

Refrain

Hallelujah! hallelujah!
He is coming again;
And with joy we shall gather round Him,
At His coming to reign.

He is coming, our loving Savior,
Blessèd Lamb that was slain;
In the glory of God the Father,
On the earth He shall reign.

Refrain

He is coming, our Lord and Master,
Our Redeemer and King;
We shall see Him in all His beauty,
And His praise we shall sing.

Refrain

He shall gather His chosen people,
Who are called by His Name;
And the ransomed of every nation
For His own He shall claim.

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_is_coming_again.php

Lift up your heads, pilgrims aweary,
See day’s approach now crimson the sky;
Night shadows flee, and your Belovèd,
Awaited with longing, at last draweth nigh.

Refrain

He is coming again, He is coming again,
The very same Jesus, rejected of men;
He is coming again, He is coming again,
With power and great glory, He is coming again!

Dark was the night, sin warred against us;
Heavy the load of sorrow we bore;
But now we see signs of His coming;
Our hearts glow within us, joy’s cup runneth o’er!

Refrain

O blessèd hope! O blissful promise!
Filling our hearts with rapture divine;
O day of days! Hail Thy appearing!
Thy transcendent glory forever shall shine.

Refrain

Even so, come, precious Lord Jesus;
Creation waits redemption to see;
Caught up in clouds, soon we shall meet Thee;
O blessèd assurance, forever with Thee!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_is_coming_he_is_coming.php

He is coming, He is coming,
Not as once He came before,
Wailing Infant born in weakness
On a lowly stable floor;
But upon His cloud of glory,
In the crimson tinted sky,
Where we see the golden sunrise,
In the rosy distance lie.

He is coming, He is coming,
Not in pain, and shame, and woe,
With the thorn crown on His forehead,
And the blood drops trickling slow;
But with diadem upon Him,
And the scepter in His hand,
And the dead all ranged before Him,
Raised from death, hell, sea and land.

He is coming, He is coming,
Not as once He wandered through
All the hostile land of Judah,
With His followers poor and few;
But with all the holy angels
Waiting round His judgment seat,
And the chosen twelve Apostles,
Sitting crownèd at His feet.

He is coming, He is coming,
Let His lowly first estate,
And His tender love, so teach us
That in faith and hope we wait,
Till in glory eastward burning,
Our redemption draweth near,
And we see the sign in heaven
Of our Judge and Savior dear.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_is_everything_to_me.php

When I was in trouble, my way was dark as night,
But Jesus gave me comfort, and brought me to the light;
He took away my sorrow, and made my burden light,
He is everything to me. 

Refrain:
If it wasn’t for the Lord, tell me what would I do?
Oh, tell me, what would I do? Oh, tell me, what would I do?
If it wasn’t for the Lord, tell me, what would I do?
He is everything to me. 

He is bread in dry places, He’s water in a thirsty land;
He is my rock and shelter, He holds me by the hand;
And when my friends forsake me, close by my side He’ll stand,
He is everything to me. 

So when my life is ended, and I must surely die,
Then He will be my gateway up to that home on high;
And in that golden city, there’ll be no more goodbyes,
He is everything to me. 



Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_is_gone_a_cloud_of_light.php

He is gone—a cloud of light
Has received Him from our sight;
High in Heav’n, where eye of men
Follows not, nor angels’ ken;
Through the veils of time and space,
Passed into the holiest place;
All the toil, the sorrow done,
All the battle fought and won.

He is gone—and we remain
In this world of sin and pain:
In the void which He has left
On this earth, of Him bereft.
We have still His work to do,
We can still His path pursue;
Seek Him both in friend and foe,
In ourselves His image show.

He is gone—we heard Him say,
“Good that I should go away,"
Gone is that dear form and face,
But not gone His present grace;
Though Himself no more we see,
Comfortless we cannot be:
No, His Spirit still is ours,
Quickening, freshening all ours powers.

He is gone—towards their goal
World and church must onward roll;
Far behind we leave the past;
Forward are our glances cast:
Still His words before us range
Through the ages as they change:
Wheresoe’er the truth shall lead,
He will give whate’er we need.

He is gone—but we once more
Shall behold Him as before;
In the heaven of heavens the same,
As on earth He went and came;
In the many mansions there,
Place for us He will prepare;
In that world unseen, unknown,
He and we shall yet be one.

He is gone—but not in vain,
Wait until He comes again:
He is risen, He is not here,
Far above this earthly sphere;
Evermore in heart and mind
There our peace in Him we find:
To our own eternal Friend,
Thitherward let us ascend.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_is_just_the_same_today.php

Have you ever heard of Jesus,
How He came from heav’n to earth,
With a name of mighty virtue,
Though by very humble birth?
When the world was held in bondage,
Under Satan’s dismal sway,
Jesus healed their dread diseases—
He is just the same today. 

Refrain:
He is just the same today,
He is just the same today;
Yes, He healed in Galilee,
Set the suff’ring captives free,
And He’s just the same today. 

Do you see the people gather
Round that great and holy Man,
Bringing all the sick and suff’ring,
Coming to Him all who can?
See Him look with great compassion,
As they fainted by the way!
How He called them gently to Him,
He is just the same today. 

Is it true that every sickness 
May be laid at Jesus’ feet?
All my trouble, care, and sorrow,
And I rest in joy complete?
Yes, my brother, every sadness,
If by faith to Him you pray,
He’ll remove with tender mercy,
For He’s just the same today. 

Oh, that precious, loving Jesus!
His compassion still the same,
Toward poor sinful, suff’ring mortals
Who seek refuge in His name.
Heed the present invitation,
Oh, you need not stay away!
Just receive His healing favor,
For He’s just the same today. 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_is_mine.php

There is a Shepherd Who cares for His own, and He is mine;
Nothing am I, He’s a King on a throne, but He is mine;
How can He love such a sinner as I, though He is mine,
I cannot fathom though often I try, but He is mine.

Refrain

He is mine; He is mine;
Though it is wonderful, yet it is true,
That He is mine.

Jesus left Heaven my Savior to be, and He is mine;
I am not worth all He suffered for me, but He is mine;
Though I’m not worthy He dwells in my heart, and He is mine;
From Him I’ll never, no, never depart, for He is mine.

Refrain

There is a Comforter come from above, He, too, is mine,
Coming to me to reveal Jesus’ love, and that is mine;
Shepherd and Savior, and Comforter, too, They all are mine;
That’s why I know the old story is true, They all are mine.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_is_near.php

I know not when the Lord will come,
Or at what hour He may appear,
Whether at midnight or at morn,
Or at what season of the year.

Refrain

I only know that He is near,
And that His voice I soon shall hear;
I only know that He is near,
And that His voice I soon shall hear;

I know not what of time remains,
To run its course, in this low sphere,
Or what awaits of calm or storm,
Of joy or grief, or hope or fear.

Refrain

I know not what is yet to run
Of spring or summer, green or sear,
Of death or life, of pain or peace,
Of shade or shine, of song or tear.

Refrain

The centuries have come and gone,
Dark centuries of absence drear;
I dare not chide the long delay,
Nor ask when I His voice shall hear.

Refrain

I do not think it can be long,
Till in His glory He appear;
And yet I dare not name the day,
Nor fix the solemn advent year.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_is_not_here_but_is_risen.php

Oh, day of awful story—
Jesus is dead!
Sad end to hope of glory—
Jesus is dead!

Refrain

Behold the stone is rolled away!
And shining ones have come to say:
“He is not here, but is risen!
He is not here, but is risen!"
The night of death is past and gone—
Arise, and greet the glorious morn!
“He is not here, but is risen!
He is not here, but is risen!"

A weary night of weeping—
Jesus is dead!
A night that knew no sleeping—
Jesus is dead!

Refrain

A day in sorrow dawning—
Jesus is dead!
A sad and gloomy morning—
Jesus is dead!

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_is_real.php

There is no way I'm gonna fight it
I'm gonna tell you how I feel
There is no reason to deny it
My God is real 
Modern man has thought of ways
To deny my God today
They think they're so educated
They don't need Him
They write their theories to deny Him
But even they can't verify them
But I know that my God is living
Through the evidence He gave 

Chorus 1:
He is real (He is)
I can see Him in the trees
I can see Him in the children
As they're playing in the leaves (in the leaves)
He is real (He is)
I can see Him in the stars
And if you will let Him in
He will live within your heart (in your heart) 

It's very strange indeed
'Bout these educated men
With the reasoning God gave them
They turn away and deny Him
If they hold but just a portion
Of the intelligence they claim
They would cast aside all foolish pride
And bow down to praise His name 

Repeat Chorus 1 

What is this world coming to
They want us to believe
The complexities of life
They say by accident conceived
Don't ignore the One with power
Creation to achieve (I believe, I believe)
Open up your heart to Him
His blessings you'll receive (hey) 

Chorus 2:
He is real (He is)
He is real
I can see Him in the children
As they're playing in the leaves (in the leaves)
He is real (my God is real)
I can see Him in the stars
And if you will let Him in
He will live within your heart (in your heart) 

He is real (He is)
I can see Him in the trees
I can see Him in the children
As they're playing in the leaves 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_is_risen.php

Said the angel, “He is risen!"
Tell it out with joyful voice:
He has burst His three days’ prison;
Let the whole wide earth rejoice:
Death is conquered, we are free,
Christ has won the victory.

Come, ye sad and fearful hearted,
With glad smile and radiant brow!
Death’s long shadows have departed;
All our woes are over now,
Due to passion that He bore—
Sin and pain can vex no more.

Come, with high and holy hymning,
Chant our Lord’s triumphant day;
Not one darksome cloud is dimming
Yonder glorious morning ray,
Breaking over the purple east:
Brighter far our Easter feast.

He is risen, He is risen!
He has opened heaven’s gate:
We are free from sin’s dark prison,
Risen to a holier state;
And a brighter Easter beam
On our longing eyes shall stream.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_is_risen2.php

O trumpet sound a vict’ry call!
And tongues proclaim good news for all:
He is risen! He is risen!
O! Let a thousand hymns break forth,
Proclaiming our Redeemer’s worth!

Refrain

Give Him glory! Give Him glory!
He is risen! He is risen!
Hallelujah!

He who was slain on our behalf,
Suff’ring beneath His Father’s wrath:
He is risen! He is risen!
He who was hung upon the tree,
Rose from the tomb in victory!

Refrain

O Christian, are you filled with gloom?
Then look inside the empty tomb!
He is risen! He is risen!
Here there is hope for ev’ry fear!
Here there is joy for ev’ry tear!

Refrain

O! Let the nations sing the fame
Of Christ the Lamb who once was slain!
He is risen! He is risen!
Now we await the coming day,
When all those raised in Christ will say:

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_is_so_precious_to_me.php

So precious is Jesus, my Savior, my King;
His praise all the day long with rapture I sing.
To Him in my weakness for strength I can cling,
For He is so precious to me.

Refrain

For He is so precious, so precious to me;
For He is so precious, so precious to me.
’Tis heaven below, my Redeemer to know,
For He is so precious to me.

He stood at my heart’s door ’mid sunshine and rain,
And patiently waited an entrance to gain.
What shame that so long He entreated in vain,
For He is so precious to me.

Refrain

I stand on the mountain of blessing at last,
No cloud in the heavens a shadow to cast,
His smile is upon me; the valley is past,
For He is so precious to me.

Refrain

I praise Him because He appointed a place
Where some day, through faith in His wonderful grace,
I know I shall see Him, shall look on His face,
For He is so precious to me.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_is_waiting.php

Come, poor sinner, come to Jesus,
Bring Him all your sin and care;
Though your soul be bowed with anguish,
He will all your trouble share. 

Refrain:
He is waiting, He is waiting,
Freely He will all forgive,
He will pardon, He will pardon,
Look to Jesus, look and live. 

Though your sins arise like mountains,
Though like crimson they appear,
Through the precious blood of Jesus
They shall be like crystal clear. 

Oh, the precious blood that bought you!
Oh, the suff’rings on the tree!
Can you slight His offered mercy,
And His love so pure and free? 

Jesus, pleading, calls the wand’rer,
Stands with outstretched arms to save;
See the wounds received on Calv’ry,
Freely there His life He gave. 

Come, then, precious soul, to Jesus,
Hasten now, your sins forsake;
Jesus ready stands to save you,
Come, oh, come before too late.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_is_waiting_for_me.php

Dear friends, listen, let me tell you,
If I but could portray
What a vision thrills my being
As I walk on this way:
There before me in such glory,
In such brightness, I see,
Stands a Bridegroom, blessed Bridegroom,
And He’s waiting for me! 

Refrain:
He is waiting, He is waiting
At the end of the way,
“I am coming, I am coming,"
With what joy I do say;
He is waiting, He is waiting
In such splendor, I see—
Hallelujah! for my Bridegroom
Is there waiting for me! 

He is fairer than the lilies,
Brighter far than the sun,
He is chief among ten thousand,
Yes, my heart He has won!
I am wholly His forever,
Yes, through eternity—
For the Bridegroom, yes, my Bridegroom,
Is now waiting for me! 

Care I any if my journey
May now seem rough and long?
Nay—His glory lights my pathway,
And His smile brings a song;
Yes, these clouds and thorns and boulders,
Oh, how small they will be
When I reach my one Beloved,
Who is waiting for me! 

I am coming, I am coming,
I will never say nay,
For His beauty fills my being,
Lost in love, I’ll obey;
What a vision, what a rapture,
What a glory I see—
There before me waits my Bridegroom,
Yes, He’s waiting for me! 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_is_with_me_still.php

Though I walk in ways unknown,
I am never left alone;
For the Lord will not forsake me while I do His will;
But whatever may betide,
He is walking by my side,
And by this I know He loves me still. 

Refrain:
He is with me still,
He is with me still;
In the sunshine or the shadow,
He is with me still. 

When the raging storm winds blow,
And the clouds are hanging low,
When the waves are beating on me, and the night is chill;
Then His presence in the storm
Quiets all my soul’s alarm,
And I know that He is with me still. 

’Mid the busy cares of life,
In the battle’s raging strife,
When around my soul are gathered all the hosts of ill;
Then a voice so sweet and clear
Whispers words of love and cheer,
And I know that He is with me still. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_just_put_himself_in_my_place.php

Shall I tell you what brought me to Jesus,
What caused me to seek His blessèd face?
It was this, that, to save and to cleanse me,
He just put Himself in my place.

Refrain

He just put Himself in my place (O bless His Name!)
He just put Himself in my place (O bless His Name!)
This is the Gospel story,
To Jesus the glory,
He just put Himself in my place.

O, He felt all my load in the garden,
My guilt He did carry on the tree;
I was lost, and condemned unto judgment,
But my Lord Himself died for me.

Refrain

Soon He’s coming again from the glory,
The prophets of God on this agree;
And till then this to others I’m telling,
That for them He died as for me.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_keepeth_me_in_peace.php

As I walk in pastures green,
By the crystal waters’ sheen,
Jesus gives me from all sorrow and from care release;
As a shepherd doth his sheep,
He my soul doth ever keep,
While I’m trusting I have perfect peace. 

Refrain:
Oh, He keepeth me in perfect peace,
Yes, He keepeth me in perfect peace;
While on Him my mind is stayed,
I can never be afraid,
For He keepeth me in perfect peace. 

Dwelling in the secret place,
Where I see my Father’s face,
I have found a heav’nly refuge, and my troubles cease;
In the shadow of His wings,
How my happy spirit sings,
For He keepeth me in perfect peace. 

From temptation’s trying hour
He will keep me by His pow’r,
If I meekly all the mandates of His law obey;
Since the blessed Savior came,
In my heart with love aflame,
Peace is reigning all along the way. 

As the apple of His eye
He will keep me till I die,
For the One who watches o’er me never falls asleep;

He surrounds me like a wall,
Yes, He is my all in all,
And my soul in perfect peace He’ll keep.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_knows.php

I know not what awaits me,
God kindly veils mine eyes,

And o’er each step of my onward way
He makes new scenes to rise;
And every joy He sends me, comes
A sweet and glad surprise. 

Refrain:
Where He may lead me I’ll follow,
My trust in Him repose,
And every hour in perfect peace
I’ll sing, He knows, He knows;
And every hour in perfect peace
I’ll sing, He knows, He knows. 

One step I see before me,
’Tis all I need to see,
The light of Heav’n more brightly shines,
When earth’s illusions flee;
And sweetly through the silence, came
His loving “Follow Me." 

Oh, blissful lack of wisdom,
’Tis blessed not to know;
He holds me with His own right hand,
And will not let me go,
And lulls my troubled soul to rest
In Him Who loves me so. 

So on I go not knowing,
I would not if I might;
I’d rather walk in the dark with God
Than go alone in the light;
I’d rather walk in faith with Him
Than go alone by sight.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_knows_and_he_hears.php

He knows and He hears
When you cry unto Him,
Though it may be your tears
Make the pathway seem dim. 

He knows and He sees
When your soul’s in distress,
And if oft on your knees
With His presence He’ll bless. 

He knows and He cares
When you’re troubled and tried,
Though it seems that your prayers
Fall so empty and void. 

He knows, yes, He knows,
Why not trust in Him then,
And confide joys and woes
To the Savior of men?

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_knows_it_all.php

I love to think my Father knows
Why I have missed the path I chose,
And that I soon shall clearly see
The way He led was best for me.

Refrain

He knows it all, He knows it all,
My Father knows, He knows it all;
Thy bitter tears how fast they fall!
He knows, my Father knows it all.

I love to think my Father knows
The thorns I pluck with every rose
The daily griefs I seek to hide
From the dear souls I walk beside.

Refrain

I love to think my Father knows
The strength or weakness of my foes,
And that I need but stand and see
Each conflict end in victory.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_knows_just_what_i_need.php

My Jesus knows when I am Lonely
He knows each pain, He sees each tear
He understands each lonely heartache
He understands because He cares

Chorus:
My Jesus knows just what I need
Oh yes! He knows just what I need
He satisfies and every need supplies
Yes, He knows just what I need

My Jesus knows when I am burdened
He knows how much my heart can bear
He lifts me up when I am sinking
And brings me joy beyond compare

Repeat Chorus

When other friends seem to forget me
When skies are dark, when hope is gone
By faith I feel His arms around me
And hear Him say, "You're not alone"

Repeat Chorus (x2)

He satisfies and every need supplies
Yes, He knows just what I need

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_knows_my_name.php

I have a Maker;

He formed my heart.

Before even time began,

My life was in His hand.



Chorus:

He knows my name;

He knows my every thought.

He sees each tear that falls

And hears me when I call.



I have a Father;

He calls me His own.

He’ll never leave me,

No matter where I go.



Chorus

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_leadeth_me.php

He leadeth me, O blessed thought!
O words with heav’nly comfort fraught!
Whate’er I do, where’er I be
Still ’tis God’s hand that leadeth me. 

Refrain:
He leadeth me, He leadeth me,
By His own hand He leadeth me;
His faithful foll’wer I would be,
For by His hand He leadeth me. 

Sometimes ’mid scenes of deepest gloom,
Sometimes where Eden’s bowers bloom,
By waters still, o’er troubled sea,
Still ’tis His hand that leadeth me. 

Lord, I would place my hand in Thine,
Nor ever murmur nor repine;
Content, whatever lot I see,
Since ’tis my God that leadeth me. 

And when my task on earth is done,
When by Thy grace the vict’ry’s won,
E’en death’s cold wave I will not flee,
Since God through Jordan leadeth me. 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_lifted_me.php

In loving kindness Jesus came,
My soul in mercy to reclaim,
And from the depths of sin and shame
Thro' grace He lifted me. 

Refrain
From sinking sand, He lifted me,
With tender hand, He lifted me,
From shades of night to planes of light,
O praise His name, He lifted me! 
He called me long before I heard,
Before my sinful heart was stirred,
But when I took Him at His Word,
Forgiv'n He lifted me. 


Refrain
From sinking sand, He lifted me,
With tender hand, He lifted me,
From shades of night to planes of light,
O praise His name, He lifted me! 
His brow was pierced with many a thorn,
His hands by cruel nails were torn,
When from my guilt and grief forlorn,
In love He lifted me. 


Refrain
From sinking sand, He lifted me,
With tender hand, He lifted me,
From shades of night to planes of light,
O praise His name, He lifted me!


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_lives_on_high.php



Christ the Savior came from Heaven’s glory,
To redeem the lost from sin and shame;
On His brow he wore the thorn-crown glory,
And upon Calvary He took my blame. 

Refrain:
He lives on high, He lives on high,
Triumphant over sin and all its stain;
He lives on high, He lives on high,
Some day He’s coming again. 

He arose from death and all its sorrow,
To dwell in that land of joy and love;
He is coming back some glad tomorrow,
And He’ll take all His children home above. 

Weary soul, to Jesus come confessing,
Redemption from sin He offers thee;
Look to Jesus and receive a blessing,
There is life, there is joy and victory! 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_lives_the_great_redeemer_lives.php

He lives! the great Redeemer lives!
What joy the blest assurance gives!
And now, before His Father, God,
Pleads the full merit of His blood,
Pleads the full merit of His blood.

Repeated crimes awake our fears,
And justice armed with frowns appears,
But in the Savior’s lovely face
Sweet mercy smiles, and all is peace,
Sweet mercy smiles, and all is peace.

In every dark, distressful hour,
When sin and Satan join their power,
Let this dear hope repel the dart,
That Jesus bears us on His heart,
That Jesus bears us on His heart.

Great Advocate, almighty Friend!
On Him our humble hopes depend;
Our cause can never, never fail,
For Jesus pleads, and must prevail,
For Jesus pleads, and must prevail.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_liveth_long_who_liveth_well.php

He liveth long who liveth well;
All other life is short and vain;
He liveth longest who can tell
Of living most for heavenly gain.

He liveth long who liveth well;
All else is being flung away;
He liveth longest who can tell
Of true things truly done each day.

Be what thou seemest; live thy creed;
Hold up to earth the torch divine:
Be what thou prayest to be made;
Let the great Master’s steps be thine.

Fill up each hour with what will last;
Buy up the moments as they go;
The life above, when this is past,
Is the ripe fruit of life below.

Sow love, and taste its fruitage pure;
Sow peace, and reap its harvest bright;
Sow sunbeams on the rock and moor,
And find a harvest-home of light.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_made_his_own_mountain.php

On the third day of beginnings as the Father gave command
With all over creation silenced the water gave way to land
It pierced through the waters just as all the other ground
Yet none could have more purpose, no greater will 'ere be found 
While the earth began to settle and He saw that it was good
That Father held His only Son, knowing sure He understood
"This rock of death is part of the journey you must face
Can you withstand the suffering, the pain and the disgrace?" 

Chorus:
He made His own mountain, like no other mountain
He saw the exact place where one day He'd die
With love for His Father and trembling spirit
He went to that mountain and gave up His life 

Then He looked on His creation for through Him it all was made
There He saw it from a distance where the groundwork had been laid
But when time had reached its fullness and He looked down from the cross
It was then He felt the suffering and the pain of all the lost 

So I went to that mountain to see it with my own eyes
The view seen by Jesus, and there I came to realize 

Repeat Chorus 

I go to that mountain and give Him my life 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_never_lied_to_me.php

Well I know that God
He promised me
That He would always be there
Though fame and fortune flee
And friends have come and gone
I will not worry for I am not alone
One day my faith grew weak
I stood on a troubled sea
I began to drown but Jesus lifted me
Well He came just in time
And now I’m doing fine
And He never lied to me
He never, He never, He never, no...

Chorus:
He never lied to me (He never, no, He never lied to me)
Oh, my Jesus (He never, no, He never lied to me)
He never lied to me (He never, no, He never lied to me)
He said when you get weary (He never, no, He never lied to me)
Just put your trust in me (He never, no, He never lied to me)
I’ll see you through all eternity (He never, no, He never lied to me)
One day my faith grew weak (He, He, He never lied to me)
I stood on a troubled sea (He never, no, He never lied to me)
I began to drown (He never, no, He never lied to me)
But Jesus lifted me (He never, no, He never lied to me)
He said He’d be my friend
Until the very end
And He never lied to me

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_never_said_a_mumbalin_word.php

They crucified my Lord,
And He never said a mumbalin’ word;
They crucified my Lord,

Refrain

And He never said a mumbalin’ word.
Not a word, not a word, not a word.

They nailed Him to a tree,
And He never said a mumbalin’ word;
They nailed Him to a tree,

Refrain

They pierced Him in the side,
And He never said a mumbalin’ word;
They pierced Him in the side,

Refrain

The blood came trickalin’ down,
And He never said a mumbalin’ word;
The blood came trickalin’ down,

Refrain

He bowed His head and died,
And He never said a mumbalin’ word;
He bowed His head and died,

Refrain



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_pardoned_my_transgressions.php

He pardoned my transgressions,
He sanctified my soul,
He honors my confessions,
Since by His blood I’m whole.

Refrain

It is truly wonderful
What the Lord has done!
It is truly wonderful!
It is truly wonderful!
It is truly wonderful
What the Lord has done!
Glory to His Name.

He keeps me ev’ry moment
By trusting in His grace;
’Tis through His best atonement,
That I may see His face.

Refrain

He brings me through affliction,
He leaves me not alone;
He’s with me in temptation,
He keeps me for His own.

Refrain

He prospers and protects me,
His blessings ever flow;
He fills me with His glory,
He makes me white as snow.

Refrain

He keeps me firm and faithful,
His love I do enjoy,
For this I shall be grateful,
And live in His employ.

Refrain

There’s not a single blessing
Which we receive on earth
That does not come from heaven,
The source of our new birth.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_ransomed_me.php

There’s a sweet and blessed story
Of the Christ who came from glory,
Just to rescue me from sin and misery;
He in loving-kindness sought me,
And from sin and shame hath brought me,
Hallelujah! Jesus ransomed me. 

Refrain:
Hallelujah! what a Savior,
Who can take a poor, lost sinner,
Lift him from the miry clay and set me free!
I will ever tell the story,
Shouting glory, glory, glory,
Hallelujah! Jesus lifted me. 

From the depth of sin and sadness
To the heights of joy and gladness
Jesus lifted me, in mercy full and free;
With His precious blood He bought me,
When I knew Him not, He sought me,
And in love divine He ransomed me. 

From the throne of heav’nly glory—
Oh, the sweet and blessed story!—
Jesus came to lift the lost in sin and woe
Into liberty all-glorious,
Trophies of His grace victorious,
Evermore rejoicing here below. 

By and by, with joy increasing,
And with gratitude unceasing,
Lifted up with Christ forevermore to be,
I will join the hosts there singing,
In the anthem ever ringing,
To the King of Love who ransomed me. 
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_reigns.php

Chorus 1:
Our God is an awesome God
He reigns from Heaven above
With wisdom, power, and love
Our God is an awesome God
Our God is an awesome God
He reigns from Heaven above
With wisdom, power, and love
Our God is an awesome God

(You're marvelous) You’re marvelous and You’re glorious (glorious)
Your love has made me victorious
You took away the fear in us
Now we praise You ’cause You have delivered us
There ain’t no stoppin’ us (there's no)
Devil, there ain’t no blockin’ us (there's no)
Come on and clap your hands with us
(Like this ya'll, like that ya'll, c'mon)

Repeat Chorus 1

(You're marvelous) You’re marvelous and You’re glorious
Your love has made me victorious
You took away the fear in us (there's no fear, not here, no)
Now we praise You ’cause You have delivered us
There ain’t no stoppin’ us
Devil, there ain’t no blockin’ us (that's good stuff right here)
Come on and clap your hands with us
(Like this ya'll, check the switch ya'll, right here now)
(That's what I'm talking about)

(I said He reigns) He reigns
(I said He reigns) He reigns
(He reigns) He reigns
(C'mon now) He reigns
(He's in control) He reigns
(He's all I know) He reigns
He reigns (He is the one)

Repeat Chorus 1

Chorus 2:
Our God is an awesome God
He reigns from Heaven above (my God is awesome now)
With wisdom, power, and love
Our God is an awesome God (He's the one in control)
Our God is an awesome God (I know)
He reigns from Heaven above
With wisdom, power, and love
Our God is an awesome God

(I said He reigns) He reigns
(I said He reigns) He reigns
(He reigns) He reigns
(I said C'mon now) Forever and ever
(Forever and ever) He reigns
(and ever Lord, I know) He reigns
He reigns


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_rose_triumphantly.php

Our blessed Lord was slain, the Christ who came to 
reign, and in a grave he lay, to wait the coming day. 

He rose triumphantly, in power and majesty,
the Saviour rose no more to die; 
O let us now proclaim the glory of his name, 
and tell to all, he lives today!

They sorrowed when He died, Nor sought the tears to hide
But soon their bitter pain was turned to joy again

The stone was rolled away, For Christ was raised that day
And now He lives above to manifest His love

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_sang_in_the_old_church_choir.php

’Twas Easter Sunday morning,
To the village I had gone;
My boyhood home where lived the ones I loved;
At the church the preacher spoke the Word,
The choir sang sweetly, too,
And in their midst an old man sang
The old songs good and true;
His voice was sweet and tender,
I seem to hear him yet
Sing again an old refrain I never will forget.

Refrain

How he sang in the old church choir
Olden songs, golden songs of a bygone day,
Sweet songs of gladness, songs, too, of sadness
That carried me far, far away,
And I longed in my soul for that heavenly goal
That he sang of so sweetly in those songs:
“Lead Kindly Light amid th’encircling gloom"
And “Rock of Ages cleft for me."
Those were the songs, the old golden songs
That he sang in the old church choir.

So here’s a simple lesson
Of the good that we can do
To help our fellow men along the way;
Just a word of cheer to those we meet
May ease an aching heart,
A song may save two souls that otherwise might drift apart.
Still in my memr’y that lingers
That singer and his song.
Sweet and low, so long ago,
To hear his voice I long.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_sat_to_watch_oer_customs_paid.php

He sat to watch o’er customs paid,
A man of scorned and hard’ning trade;
Alike the symbol and the tool
Of foreign masters’ hated rule.

But grace within his breast had stirred;
There needed but the timely word;
It came, true Lord of souls! from Thee,
That royal summons, “Follow Me."

Enough, when Thou wert passing by
To hear Thy voice, to meet Thine eye;
He rose, responsive to the call,
And left his task, his gains, his all.

O wise exchange! with these to part
And lay up treasure in Thy heart;
With twofold crown of light to shine
Amid Thy servants’ foremost line!

Come, Savior, as in days of old;
Pass where the world has strongest hold,
And faithless care and selfish greed
Are thorns that choke the holy seed.

Who keep Thy gifts, O bid them claim
The steward’s, not the owner’s name;
Who yield all up for Thy dear sake,
Let them of Matthew’s wealth partake.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_saved_us.php

Chorus:
He saved us
Not because of righteous things we’ve done
He saved us
Through the washing of His precious blood
He saved us through the sacrifice of His only Son
Through His mercy we’re saved by love
Repeat Chorus

It is with a grateful heart that I come to you today
It is with humble adoration
That I take this time to say
I know that I’m not all I could be
And I don’t always see
That He’s beside me and to guide me and to comfort me
(He’s guiding me)

Repeat Chorus

If you’ve got a troubled mind
And you can find no rest
If you’ve been worried ‘bout the future
And you wonder if you’re blessed
I know that He’s got all that I need
And He can always see
When I am falling I can call and He will rescue me
(He’ll rescue me)

Repeat Chorus (x2)

We’re saved by love, we’re saved by love
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_saves_the_uttermost.php

I’ve found the Savior who died for man,
He saves to the uttermost;
I’ve proved redemption a perfect plan,
He saves to the uttermost. 

Refrain:
He saves to the uttermost,
He saves to the uttermost;
He’s the only One in whom I can boast,
He saves to the uttermost. 

I sought and tasted His pard’ning love,
He saves to the uttermost;
And streams of glory came from above,
He saves to the uttermost. 

He cleansed my spirit from inbred sin,
He saves to the uttermost;
And now the Comforter dwells within,
He saves to the uttermost. 

Though far you’ve wandered away from God,
He saves to the uttermost;
His grace He offers—a ceaseless flood,
He saves to the uttermost. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_set_me_free.php

My soul is filled with joy and gladness
Since Jesus came to me.
His love has banished all my sadness,
From sin I am set free.

Refrain

He set me free, He set me free,
I was blind, but hallelujah, now I see!
I shall ne’er forget the day
When He washed my sins away,
And He set, He set me free.

The Comforter divine is dwelling
Within my soul today;
His love to others I am telling
Since Jesus came to stay.

Refrain

The grace of Jesus hath abounded
For all my sins I see,
Salvation walls have me surrounded,
From sin I am set free.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_shall_be_called.php

He shall be called Wonderful Counselor, Almighty God
He shall be called Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace
His name is Jesus, for He will save His people from sin
His name Immanuel, God with man

Jesus is called Wonderful Counselor, Almighty God
Jesus is called Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace
His name is Jesus, for He saves His people from sin
His name Immanuel, God with man
His name Immanuel, God with man

We praise Your name Wonderful Counselor, 
Almighty God
We praise Your name Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace
We love You Jesus, for You save Your people from sin
We love You Immanuel, God with man
We love You Immanuel, God with man

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_shall_gather_the_lambs.php

“He shall feed His flock like a shepherd,
He shall gather the lambs with His arm."
In His bosom they shall be ever
Safely shielded from all harm. 

Refrain:
He shall gather the lambs,
Shall gather the lambs with His arm of love;
He shall gather the lambs,
Shall gather the lambs with His arm. 

“He shall feed His flock like a shepherd":
Oh, how precious the promise to me!
Shepherd kind, how blest the assurance
That the lambs are dear to Thee. 

“He shall feed His flock like a shepherd":
Oh, the depth of His wonderful love!
Lead us, guide us, wonderful Shepherd,
Safe into Thy fold above. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_shed_his_blood_for_all.php

Nineteen hundred million souls,
Standing near the final goal,
Soon we’ll see the awful judgment on them fall;
Must they truly be consigned
To the pit, and there confined,
Since the blessed Savior shed His blood for all? 

Every second, sad to tell,
Counts another soul in hell,
Dreadful sight to see them bound in sin’s dark pall;
What in life we all may do,
Can but save a very few,
Yet the blessed Savior shed His blood for all. 

Though a million be brought in,
There’s a billion yet in sin,
Quickly bear the gospel message unto all;
Preach the word at any cost,
For the world in sin is lost,
Yet the blessed Savior shed His blood for all. 

Can we tarry home for dross,
While beholding such a loss?
If we can, from heaven’s grace we’ll surely fall;
Quickly leave thy cottage door,
Spread the truth from shore to shore,
For the blessed Savior shed His blood for all. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_shows_me_everything.php

He shows me everything (everything)
That I can be (can be)
And with His loving hand (And with His loving hand)
He strengthens me (He strengthens me) Ooh... 

When everything's wrong, He seems to make it alright
He shows me everything I can be
When I'm at my weakest, He gives strength for the fight
He shows me everything I can be
Ooh...
He shows me everything I can be 

When life is a struggle, He says all is not lost
He shows me everything I can be
When I look away, He points me back to the cross
He shows me everything I can be
Ooh...
He shows me everything I can be 

Chorus:
He paid the price, a sacrifice
For every sinner like me
He gave a light, that shines so bright
To show me everything I can be
Ooh...
He shows me everything I can be 

When everything's chaos, He restores peace and calm
He shows me everything I can be
When I start to fall, He lets me lean on His arm
He shows me everything I can be
Ooh...
He shows me everything I can be 

On my own I cannot see
All He wants me to be
With the faith that He's given to me
Now I know I'm totally free, ooh... 

When I try to earn it, He reminds me it's grace
He shows me everything I can be
When I'm full of pride, He puts me back in my place
He shows me everything I can be
Ooh...
He shows me everything I can be 

Repeat Chorus 

He shows me everything (everything)
That I can be

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_stood_before_the_court.php

He stood before the court

on trial instead of us;
he met its power to hurt,
condemned to face the cross:
our king, accused
of treachery;
our God, abused
for blasphemy!

These are the crimes that tell
the tale of human guilt;
our sins, our death, our hell
on these the case is built:
to this world's powers
their Lord stays dumb;
the guilt is ours,
no answers come.

Te sentence must be passed,
the unknown prisoner killed;
the price is paid at last,
the law of God fulfilled:
he takes our blame,
and from that day
the accuser's claim
is wiped away.

Shall we be judged and tried?
In Christ our trial is done;
we live, for he has died,
our condemnation gone:
in Christ are we
both dead and raised,
alive and free
his name be praised!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_supplieth_all_of_my_need.php

All of my need He freely supplieth,
Day after day His goodness I prove;
Mercies unfailing, new every morning,
Tell me of God’s unchangeable love.
Refrain

God hath laid help on One that is mighty,
One who is Friend and Brother indeed;
Nothing have I, yet I am contented,
For He supplieth all of my need.

All of my need He freely supplieth,
Wisdom and guidance, strength as my day;
Grace for each trial, comfort in sorrow,
Blessèd communion all of the way.

Refrain

All of my need He freely supplieth,
There’s not a void that He cannot feel;
Never a burden He cannot lighten,
Never a heartache He cannot heal.

Refrain

All of my need He freely supplieth,
I shall not want, whatever betide;
He that delivered Christ for my ransom,
With Him will all things surely provide.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_that_believes_and_is_baptized.php

He that believes and is baptized
Shall see the Lord’s salvation;
Baptized into the death of Christ,
He is a new creation.
Through Christ’s redemption he shall stand
Among the glorious heavenly band
Of every tribe and nation.

With one accord, O God, we pray:
Grant us Thy Holy Spirit;
Look Thou on our infirmity
Through Jesus’ blood and merit.
Grant us to grow in grace each day
That by this sacrament we
Eternal life inherit.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_that_goeth_forth_with_weeping.php

He that goeth forth with weeping,
Bearing precious seed in love,
Never tiring, never sleeping,
Findeth mercy from above.

Soft descend the dews of heaven,
Bright the rays celestial shine;
Precious fruits will thus be given
Through an influence all divine.

Sow thy seed; be never weary;
Let no fears thy soul annoy;
Be the prospect ne’er so dreary,
Thou shalt reap the fruits of joy.

Lo! the scene of verdure brightening,
See the rising grain appear:
Look again; the fields are whitening,
For the harvest time is near.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_that_is_down_needs_fear_no_fall.php

He that is down needs fear no fall,
he that is low no pride;
he that is humble ever shall
have God to be his guide.

I am content with what I have,
little be it or much;
and, Lord, contentment still I crave,
because thou savest such.

Fullness to such a burden is
that go on pilgrimage;
here little, and hereafter bliss,
is best from age to age.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_the_pearly_gates_will_open.php

Love divine, so great and wondrous,
Deep and mighty, pure, sublime!
Coming from the heart of Jesus,
Just the same through tests of time.

Refrain

He the pearly gates will open,
So that I may enter in;
For He purchased my redemption
And forgave me all my sin.

Like a dove when hunted, frightened,
As a wounded fawn was I;
Brokenhearted, yet He healed me,
He will heed the sinner’s cry.

Refrain

Love divine, so great and wondrous,
All my sins He then forgave!
I will sing His praise forever,
For His blood, His power to save.

Refrain

In life’s eventide, at twilight,
At His door I’ll knock and wait;
By the precious love of Jesus
I shall enter Heaven’s gate.

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_took_my_feet_from_the_miry_clay.php

He took my feet from the miry clay,
Yes, He did! Yes, He did!
And placed them on the rock to stay,
Yes, He did! Yes, He did!

Refrain

I can tell the world about this,
I can tell the nations I’m blest,
Tell them that Jesus made me whole,
And He brought joy, joy to my soul!

O my Lord did just what He said,
Yes, He did! Yes, He did!
He healed the sick and He raised the dead,
Yes, He did! Yes, He did!

Refrain

O Jesus washed my sins away,
Yes, He did! Yes, He did!
And made me happy all the day,
Yes, He did! Yes, He did!

Refrain

He died on the cross to save my soul,
Yes, He did! Yes, He did!
He ransomed me and made me whole,
Yes, He did! Yes, He did!

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_took_my_sins_away.php

I came to Jesus, weary, worn, and sad.
He took my sins away, He took my sins away.
And now His love has made my heart so glad,
He took my sins away.

Refrain

He took my sins away, He took my sins away,
And keeps me singing every day!
I知 so glad He took my sins away,
He took my sins away.

The load of sin was more than I could bear.
He took my sins away, He took my sins away.
And now on Him I roll my ev池y care,
He took my sins away.

Refrain

No condemnation have I in my heart,
He took my sins away, He took my sins away.
His perfect peace He did to me impart,
He took my sins away.

Refrain

If you will come to Jesus Christ today,
He値l take your sins away, He値l take your sins away,
And keep you happy in His love each day,
He値l take your sins away.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_touched_me.php

1. Shackled by a heavy burden,
'neath a load of guilt and shame;
Then the hand of Jesus touched me,
And now I am no longer the same.
. 
Refrain:
He touched me, O, He touched me,
And O, the joy that floods my soul.
Something happened, and now I know,
He touched me and made me whole. 

2. Since I met this blessed Savior,
Since He cleansed and made me whole;
I will never cease to praise Him,
I'll shout it while eternity rolls.
Refrain: 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_touched_me_and_made_me_whole.php

To the feet of my Savior in trembling and fear,
A penitent sinner I came;
He saw, and in mercy, He bade me draw near;
All glory and praise to His Name.
Refrain

He touched me and thus made me whole;
Bringing comfort and rest to my soul;
O glad happy day, all my sins rolled away!
For He touched me and thus made me whole.

I knew not the tender compassion and love
That Jesus, my Savior, had shown;
Tho’ burdened with grief, His dear hand brought relief,
He healed me and called me His own.


Refrain

“My grace is sufficient," I heard His dear voice,
“O come and find rest for your soul;
From sin you to save, My life freely I gave;
I died that you might be made whole."

Refrain

O Jesus, dear Jesus, Thy Name I adore,
For saving and keeping my soul;
Thy praises I’ll sing, my Redeemer and King,
Thy dear, loving hand made me whole.

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_walks_among_the_golden_lamps.php

He walks among the golden lamps
on feet like burnished bronze:
his hair as snows of winter white,
his eyes with fire aflame, and bright
his glorious robe of seamless light
surpassing Solomon's.

And in his hand the seven stars,
and from his mouth a sword:
his voice the thunder of the seas;
all creatures bow to his decrees
who holds the everlasting keys
and reigns as sovereign Lord.

More radiant that the sun at noon,
who was, and is to be:
who was, from everlasting days;
who lives, the Lord of all our ways--
to him be majesty and praise
for all eternity.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_wants_a_poor_sinner_like_me.php

He wants a poor sinner like me.

Refrain

He wants a poor sinner like me,
Oh, wonderful love, can it be!
Christ shed His own blood to redeem me,
He wants a poor sinner like me.

When I see Him beneath the cross bending,
When I hear the sharp nails His flesh rending,
When I see His blood flow,
Jesus loves me I know,
He wants a poor sinner like me.

Refrain

Yes, He wants all the sinful, the grieving,
His dear arms are held out for receiving.
I no longer will stay from this Savior away,
He wants a poor sinner like me.

Refrain

Yes, He wants by His hand now to hold me,
And with His mighty love to enfold me;
Yes, He wants me to stay in His presence alway,
He wants a poor sinner like me.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_wants_his_way_in_thee.php

have heard a most wonderful story
Of the Son of the Highest in glory,
How my heart He doth seek, though so sinful, so weak,
God has sent the Holy Spirit
To our hearts an honored guest,
To deliver us from evil,
And to bring us peace and rest;
He has come to work within us
Heaven’s purposes so blest:
He wants His way in thee. 

Refrain:
Yield unto the Holy Spirit,
Let Him have His way in thee;
Be thou ready to obey Him,
He leads to victory. 

Let the Spirit do the planning,
Point the way thy feet shall go;
Greater than thine own His wisdom,
He the will of God doth know;
Better, wiser than thy choosing
Is the way that He will show:
He wants His way in thee. 

He doth sometimes work in silence,
When thou dost not know at all;
He doth sometimes speak so softly
Thou must listen for His call;
But if thou wilt trust Him fully,
He will be thine all in all:
He wants His way in thee. 

All thyself to Him surrender,
As He pleases let Him do;
In the paths He leadeth, follow,
Whether they be old or new;
When the tasks seem hard before thee,
He with power will endue:
He wants His way in thee. 
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_wants_not_friends_that_hath_thy_love.php

He wants not friends that hath Thy love,
And may converse and walk with Thee;
And with Thy saints here and above,
With whom forever I must be.

In the communion of the saints
Is wisdom, safety and delight;
And, when my heart declines and faints,
It’s raised by their heat and light.

As for my friends, they are not lost;
The several vessels of Thy fleet,
Though parted now, by tempests tossed,
Shall safely in the haven meet.

Still we are centered all in Thee,
Members, though distant, of one head;
In the same family we be,
By the same faith and Spirit led.

Before Thy throne we daily meet
As joint petitioners to Thee;
In spirit we each other greet,
And shall again each other see.

The heav’nly hosts, world without end,
Shall be my company above;
And Thou, my best and surest Friend,
Who shall divide me from Thy love?
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_was_nailed_to_the_cross_for_me.php

What a wonderful, wonderful Savior,
Who would die on the cross for me!
Freely shedding His precious lifeblood,
That the sinner might be made free.

Refrain

He was nailed to the cross for me,
He was nailed to the cross for me;
On the cross crucified for me He died;
He was nailed to the cross for me.

Thus He left His heavenly glory,
To accomplish His Father’s plan;
He was born of the virgin Mary,
Took upon Him the form of man.

Refrain

He was wounded for our transgressions,
And He carried our sorrows, too;
He’s the Healer of ev’ry sickness,
This He came to the world to do.

Refrain

So He gave His life for others
In Redeeming this world from sin,
And He’s gone to prepare a mansion,
That at last we may enter in.

Refrain
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_was_not_willing.php

“He was not willing that any should perish";
Jesus enthroned in the glory above,
Saw our poor fallen world, pitied our sorrows,
Poured out His life for us, wonderful love!
Perishing, perishing! Thronging our pathway,
Hearts break with burdens too heavy to bear:
Jesus would save, but there’s no one to tell them,
No one to lift them from sin and despair.

“He was not willing that any should perish";
Clothed in our flesh with its sorrow and pain,
Came He to seek the lost, comfort the mourner,
Heal the heart broken by sorrow and shame.
Perishing, perishing! Harvest is passing,
Reapers are few and the night draweth near:
Jesus is calling thee, haste to the reaping,
Thou shalt have souls, precious souls for thy hire.

Plenty for pleasure, but little for Jesus;
Time for the world with its troubles and toys,
No time for Jesus’ work, feeding the hungry,
Lifting lost souls to eternity’s joys.
Perishing, perishing! Hark, how they call us;
Bring us your Savior, oh, tell us of Him!
We are so weary, so heavily laden,
And with long weeping our eyes have grown dim.

“He was not willing that any should perish";
Am I His follower, and can I live
Longer at ease with a soul going downward,
Lost for the lack of the help I might give!
Perishing, perishing! Thou wast not willing;
Master, forgive, and inspire us anew;
Banish our worldliness, help us to ever
Live with eternity’s values in view.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_was_there_all_the_time1.php

He was there all the Time

Time after time I was searching
For peace in some void
I was trying to blame all my ills
On this world I was in
Surface relationships used me
Til I was done in
But all the time someone was waiting
To free me from my sin

Chorus:
He was there all the time
He was there all the time
Waiting patiently in line
He was there all the time

Never again will I look
For a fake rainbow's end
Now that I have the answer for my life
It's just starting to mend
And living each new day with Him
Is a breath of fresh life
And oh what I've missed
He was there patiently waiting in line

Repeat Chorus (x2) 

He was there all the time 
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_was_wounded_for_me.php

I have read in His word how the blessed Savior came
To this world, and He died on the tree;
There my Savior and Lord, yes, my Prophet, Priest, and King—
He was bruised and was wounded for me. 

Refrain:
He was wounded for me, He was wounded for me,
Christ the Savior was wounded for me;
For my sins and transgressions, O my Lord, this my plea,
That Jesus, my Savior, was wounded for me. 

Oh, my soul, stand in awe, see what anguish He has borne,
In the garden alone, all for thee;
There was nothing of earth for thy sins that could atone,
Then He died, yes, He died there for me. 

Now I bow at His feet, and the story I repeat,
Of His love that has reached even me;
I will praise His great name, and shall never cease to sing,
That my Savior was wounded for me. 
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_whispers_his_love_to_me.php

’Tis so sweet just to know that along the way
Jesus walks by my side all the livelong day,
And He knows when the shadows begin to low’r,
And He whispers His love to me o’er and o’er. 

Refrain:
He whispers His love to me,
He whispers His love to me;
Lest I should stray from Him away,
He whispers His love to me. 

When He scatters the gifts from His boundless store,
And His showers of blessing around me pour,
Lest I humble and grateful forget to be,
Jesus whispers His wonderful love to me. 

When my heart is so tempted and sorely tried,
It is then that I know He is by my side,
And I know He will give me the victory,
As He whispers His wonderful love to me. 

Oh, His voice is so wondrously sweet to me!
There’s no music on earth has such melody;
There’s no joy that can come to the human heart
Like the joy that His love ever doth impart. 
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_whispers_sweet_peace_to_me.php

Sometime when misgivings darken the day
And faith's light I cannot see
I ask my dear Lord to brighten the way
He whispers sweet peace to me (to me)

Chorus:
He whispers sweet peace to me (yes He whispers to me)
He whispers sweet peace to me (He whispers sweet peace to me)
When I am cast down in spirit and soul
He whispers sweet peace to me (to me)

He speaks through His word, assurance He gives
I'm His and I know He's mine
And safe in the fold my soul He will keep
I'll rest in His love divine (divine)

Repeat Chorus (x2)
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_who_began.php

He who began a good work in you
He who began a good work in you
Will be faithful to complete it
He’ll be faithful to complete it
He who started the work
Will be faithful to complete it in you

The struggle you’re facing is slowly
Replacing your hope with despair
For the process is long
And you’re losing your song in the night
You can be sure that the Lord
Has His hand on you, safe and secure
He will never abandon you
You are His treasure
And He finds His pleasure in youhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_who_once_in_righteous_vengeance.php

He Who once in righteous vengeance
Whelmed the world beneath the flood,
Once again in mercy cleansed it
With His own most precious blood,
Coming from His throne on high
On the painful cross to die.

O the wisdom of th’Eternal!
O the depth of love divine!
O the sweetness of that mercy
Which in Jesus Christ did shine!
We were sinners doomed to die;
Jesus paid the penalty.

When before the Judge we tremble,
Conscious of His broken laws,
May the blood of His atonement
Cry aloud, and plead our cause,
Bid our guilty terrors cease,
Be our pardon and our peace.

Prince and Author of salvation,
Lord of Majesty supreme,
Jesu, praise to Thee be given
By the world Thou didst redeem;
Glory to the Father be
And the Spirit One with Thee.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_who_suns_and_worlds_upholdeth.php

He Who suns and worlds upholdeth
Lends us His upholding hand;
He the ages Who unfoldeth
Doth our times and ways command.
God is for us, God is for us;
In His strength and stay we stand.

He Who sage and seer instructed
Will not keep from us His lore;
Who those ancient saints conducted
Hath not giv’n His guiding o’er.
God is for us, God is for us;
Helpful now as heretofore.

’Gainst oppression forth He sends us;
His the cause of truth and right;
With His own great host He binds us,
Lendeth us of His own might;
God is for us, God is for us;
Brings to happy end the fight.

Onward, upward doth He beckon;
Onward, upward would we press;
As His own our burdens reckon,
As our own His strength possess.
God is for us, God is for us;
God, our Helper, still we bless.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_who_to_jesus_manfully_bore_witness.php

He who to Jesus manfully bore witness,
He whom God's people join to-day to honour,
Now in the hidden mansions of the blessed
Bideth for ever.

With store of virtues God adorned his spirit,
Guiding his willing feet in paths of goodness,
Through all the earthly years while in his body
Mortal breath tarried.

Wherefore with voices linked in happy chorus
Hymn we his praises on this holy feast-day,
Praying for grace to follow in his footsteps
Now and hereafter.

Glory and honour, power and salvation
Be unto him, who, throned in the highest,
Ordereth meetly earth and sky and ocean,
Triune, eternal.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_who_would_valiant_be.php

He who would valiant be ’gainst all disaster,
Let him in constancy follow the Master.
There’s no discouragement shall make him once relent
His first avowed intent to be a pilgrim.

Who so beset him round with dismal stories
Do but themselves confound—his strength the more is.
No foes shall stay his might; though he with giants fight,
He will make good his right to be a pilgrim.

Since, Lord, Thou dost defend us with Thy Spirit,
We know we at the end, shall life inherit.
Then fancies flee away! I’ll fear not what men say,
I’ll labor night and day to be a pilgrim.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The original text from Pilgrim’s Progress:

Who would true valour see,
Let him come hither;
One here will constant be,
Come wind, come weather
There’s no discouragement
Shall make him once relent
His first avowed intent
To be a pilgrim.

Whoso beset him round
With dismal stories
Do but themselves confound;
His strength the more is.
No lion can him fright,
He’ll with a giant fight,
He will have a right
To be a pilgrim.

Hobgoblin nor foul fiend
Can daunt his spirit,
He knows he at the end
Shall life inherit.
Then fancies fly away,
He’ll fear not what men say,
He’ll labor night and day
To be a pilgrim.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_whose_confession_god_of_old_accepted.php

He, whose confession God of old accepted,
Whom through the ages all now hold in honor,
Gaining his guerdon this day came to enter
Heaven’s high portal.

God-fearing, watchful, pure of mind and body,
Holy and humble, thus did all men find him,
While, through his members, to the life immortal
Mortal life called him.

Thus to the weary, from the life enshrinèd,
Potent in virtue, flowed humane compassion;
Sick and sore laden, howsoever burdened,
There they found healing.

So now in chorus, giving God the glory,
Raise we our anthem gladly to his honor,
That in fair kinship we may all be sharers
Here and hereafter.

Honor and glory, power and salvation,
Be in the highest unto Him Who reigneth
Changeless in Heaven over earthly changes
Triune, eternal.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_will_answer_every_prayer.php

God has given you His promise
That He hears and answers prayer.
He will heed your supplication
If you cast on Him your care.

Refrain

He will answer every prayer,
He will answer every prayer,
Go to Him in faith believing,
He will answer every prayer.

He will not withhold one blessing,
He will give you what is best.
God will answer by His Spirit,
Every one who makes request.

Refrain

He can hear the great petition,
And the smallest, over there.
Unto God pray without ceasing,
He will answer every prayer.

Refrain

Take to God your plans and failures,
Any time and anywhere.
No one ever goes unanswered,
For He answers every prayer.

Refrain
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_will_be_raised_up.php

Chorus:
He will be raised up, lifted up, highly exalted
Raised up, lifted up, highly exalted
Raised up, lifted up, highly exalted
Jesus, Jesus my Lord 
Repeat Chorus 

We're raising the Father, (we raise You) the creator of life
We're lifting the Father, (we lift You) with our soul and our mind
Exalting the Father, (we exalt You) all the glory deserved
We're praising the Father, with our lives we will serve 

Repeat Chorus 

We're raising the Savior, (we raise You) our Messiah and King
We're lifting the Savior, (we lift You) and His praises we sing
Exalting the Savior, (we exalt You) to His throne up on high
We're praising the Savior, 'til we meet Him in the sky 

Repeat Chorus 

We're raising the Spirit, (we raise You) blessed comforter divine
We're lifting the Spirit, (we lift You) holy, tender, and kind
Exalting the Spirit, (we exalt You) as He lives in our heart
We're praising the Spirit, and we never will depart 

Repeat Chorus (x2) 

Oh, Jesus, Jesus my Lord (my Lord)
Jesus, Jesus my Lord (Jesus)
Jesus, Jesus my Lord 
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_will_care_for_me.php

I walk today in the Christian way,
Though dangers I may see;
I will not fear for the Lord is near,
And He will care for me. 

Refrain:
No matter what happens, He will care for me;
He will care for me, He will care for me.
And His mighty hand will enable me to stand,
No matter what happens to me. 

No test I face but sufficient grace
Is ready for my need;
When sorrows rise to obscure my skies,
He proves a friend indeed. 

He will not fail in the strongest gale
That stormy winds can blow;
And in His grace is a hiding place
Unknown to any foe. 

I trust in Him though disasters grim
Before me seem to be;
He calms my fears, and He dries my tears,
And faithful is to me. 
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_will_come_and_save_you.php

Chorus:
He will come and save you, He will come and save you
Say to the weary one, "Your God will surely come"
He will come and save you
He will come and save you, He will come and save you
Lift up your eyes to Him, you will arise again
He will come and save you 

Say to those who are fearful hearted, (don't be afraid) "Do not be afraid" 
(don't be afraid)
The Lord your God is strong and with His mighty arm
When you call on His name, He will come and save 

Repeat Chorus 

Say to those who are broken hearted, (don't lose your faith) "Do not lose your 
faith" (don't lose your faith)
The Lord your God is strong and with His loving arm
When you call on His name, He will come and save 

Repeat Chorus 

Lift up your eyes to Him, you will arise again
He will come and save you 
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_will_hide_me.php

When the storms of life are raging,
Tempests wild on sea and land,
I will seek a place of refuge
In the shadow of God’s hand. 

Refrain:
He will hide me, He will hide me,
Where no harm can e’er betide me;
He will hide me, safely hide me,
In the shadow of His hand. 

Though He may send some affliction,
’Twill but make me long for home;
For in love and not in anger,
All His chastenings will come. 

Enemies may strive to injure,
Satan all his arts employ;
He will turn what seems to harm me
Into everlasting joy. 

So while here the cross I’m bearing,
Meeting storms and billows wild,
Jesus for my soul is caring,
Naught can harm His Father’s child. 

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_will_hold_me_fast.php

When I fear my faith will fail,
Christ will hold me fast;
When the tempter would prevail,
He can hold me fast.

Refrain

He will hold me fast,
He will hold me fast;
For my Savior loves me so,
He will hold me fast.

I could never keep my hold,
He will hold me fast;
For my love is often cold,
He must hold me fast.

Refrain

I am precious in His sight,
He will hold me fast;
Those He saves are His delight.
He will hold me fast.

Refrain

He’ll not let my soul be lost,
Christ will hold me fast;
Bought by Him at such a cost,
He will hold me fast.

Refrainhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_will_lead_his_children_home.php

We read and heard a story from the Blessed Old Book
How the walls of Jericho the people marched around
And when that trumpet sounded, how the mighty walls shook
Walls around the city came a-tumblin down 
Chorus: 

The Lord delivered Daniel from the hungry lions' den
He rolled the waters back before old Moses and his men
He led the people out of Egypt's bondage and it's sin
The Lord, He calmed the ocean and the mighty winds that blew
He saved the Hebrew children from the fiery furnace, too
He rose up from the grave just like the prophets said He'd do
Never will forsake us, matter not what may come
Safely He will lead His faithful children on home 

The Lord said, "Brother Jonah, go to Ninevah land"
But he disobeyed the Lord by hidin' away
Then Jonah got converted to obey the command
From the whale the Lord delivered him on that day 

Repeat Chorus 

The Lord has raised the dead and caused the blind men to see
He cleansed the lepers spots and turned the water to wine
The Lord's the same today and now forever will be
There's no other power like the Savior Divine 

Repeat Chorus 
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_will_not_let_me_fall.php



My faith temptation shall not move,
For Jesus knows it all,
And holds me with His arm of love—
He will not let me fall.

Refrain

He will not let me fall,
He will not let me fall,
He is my Strength, my Hope, my All,
He will not let me fall.

When grief is more than I can bear—
To weak am I to call—
If I but lift my heart in prayer,
He will not let me fall.

Refrain

Sometimes I falter, filled with fear,
I cannot see at all,
His voice I never fail to hear—
“I will not let thee fall."

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_is_with_me_still.php

Though I walk in ways unknown,
I am never left alone;
For the Lord will not forsake me while I do His will;
But whatever may betide,
He is walking by my side,
And by this I know He loves me still. 

Refrain:
He is with me still,
He is with me still;
In the sunshine or the shadow,
He is with me still. 

When the raging storm winds blow,
And the clouds are hanging low,
When the waves are beating on me, and the night is chill;
Then His presence in the storm
Quiets all my soul’s alarm,
And I know that He is with me still. 

’Mid the busy cares of life,
In the battle’s raging strife,
When around my soul are gathered all the hosts of ill;
Then a voice so sweet and clear
Whispers words of love and cheer,
And I know that He is with me still. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_had_it_planned_long_ago.php



We come to a moment so great in our lives,
We look at each other, with tears in our eyes,
So thankful to God for this moment in time,
But He had it planned long ago. 

Chorus
He holds the heavens in space, the world in its place;
The mountains and valleys are all His, we know.
A man and a woman, a love that's forever, yes,
He had it planned long ago. 
Today there's the question: "How long will it last,
How soon will the joy of this moment be past?"
The answer is, "Never" if we really know
That He had it planned long ago. 


Chorus
He holds the heavens in space, the world in its place;
The mountains and valleys are all His, we know.
A man and a woman, a love that's forever, yes,
He had it planned long ago. 
There's nobody greater that God up above,
He'll keep us together with His great arms of love.
And we'll never be lonely on earth, here below,
For He had it planned long ago. 


Chorus
He holds the heavens in space, the world in its place;
The mountains and valleys are all His, we know.
A man and a woman, a love that's forever, yes,
He had it planned long ago. 
He holds the heavens in space, the world in its place;
The mountains and valleys are all His, we know.
A man and a woman, a love that's forever, yes,
He had it planned long ago. 

Oh yes, He had it planned long ago.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_is_yahweh.php

Who is moving on the waters
Who is holding up the moon 
Who is peeling back the darkness
With the burning light of noon
Who is standing on the mountains
Who is on the earth below
Who is bigger than the heavens
And the lover of my soul

Creator God, He is Yahweh
The Great I Am, He is Yahweh
The Lord of All, He is Yahweh
Rose of Sharon, He is Yahweh
The Righteous Son, He is Yahweh
The Three-in-one, He is Yahweh

Who is He that makes me happy
Who is He that gives me peace
Who is He that brings me comfort
And turns the bitter into sweet
Who is stirring up my passion
Who is rising up in me
Who is filling up my hunger
With everything I need

You are holy and eternal
And forever You will reign

Every knee will bow before You 
Every tongue will confess your name
All the angels give you glory
As they stand before Your throne
And here on Earth we gather
To declare Your name alone
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_leads_us_on.php

He leads us on by paths we did not know;
Upward He leads us, tho’ our steps be slow;
Tho’ oft we faint and falter on the way,
Tho’ storms and darkness oft obscure the day,
Yet when the clouds are gone,
We know He leads us on.

He leads us on thro’ all th’unquiet years;
Past all our dreamland hopes, and doubts, and fears
He guides our steps; thro’ all the tangled maze
Of losses, sorrows, and o’erclouded days
We know His will is done,
And still He leads us on.

And He, at last—after the weary strife,
After the restless fever we call life,
After the dreariness, the aching pain,
The wayward struggles which have proved in vain,
After our toils are past—
Will give us rest at last.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_lifted_me.php

In loving kindness Jesus came,
My soul in mercy to reclaim,
And from the depths of sin and shame
Thro' grace He lifted me. 

Refrain
From sinking sand, He lifted me,
With tender hand, He lifted me,
From shades of night to planes of light,
O praise His name, He lifted me! 
He called me long before I heard,
Before my sinful heart was stirred,
But when I took Him at His Word,
Forgiv'n He lifted me. 


Refrain
From sinking sand, He lifted me,
With tender hand, He lifted me,
From shades of night to planes of light,
O praise His name, He lifted me! 
His brow was pierced with many a thorn,
His hands by cruel nails were torn,
When from my guilt and grief forlorn,
In love He lifted me. 


Refrain
From sinking sand, He lifted me,
With tender hand, He lifted me,
From shades of night to planes of light,
O praise His name, He lifted me!


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_lives_again.php

Written by George Burns


Have you heard the wondrous story
Of the victory for God,
How the Lord of life and glory,
Sin beneath His feet hath trod?

Refrain

Sing it out, oh, sing it ever,
Till the hills take up the strain,
And the saints beyond the river—
Join to sing, “He lives again!"

Have you heard the wondrous story
Of a wide and open grave,
Out of which the Lord of glory
Hath come forth with power to save?

Refrain

Have you heard the wondrous story
Of the captive souls set free
By the Lord of life and glory,
Who hath brought them liberty?

Refrain

May I tell the wondrous story,
For I know its worth so well,
How the Lord of life and glory,
Saved my soul from death and hell?

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_set_the_joybells_ringing.php

Oh, bless the Lord, He cleansed my soul,
And filled my lips with singing;
He came in my poor, sinful heart,
And set the joy-bells ringing.
Refrain

Oh, praise the Lord, He first loved me;
I feel new life upspringing;
He came in my poor, sinful heart,
And set the joy-bells ringing.

He placed my feet upon the Rock,
The only sure foundation;
He shows me wonders of His grace,
The blessings of salvation.

Refrain

His promise is “for all the days,"
His love for me is caring;
While in the “Father’s House" above,
A mansion He’s preparing.

Refrain

His love is calling, seeking still,
Come, every burden bringing;
The touch of Christ within your heart
Will set the joy-bells ringing.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_that_winneth_souls_is_wise.php

Blessed is the service of our Lord and King,
Precious are the jewels we may help to bring;
Down the passing ages words of counsel ring:
He that winneth souls is wise.

Refrain:
He that winneth souls is wise;
In the home beyond the skies,
There's a crown of glory,
O the wondrous prize!
He that winneth souls is wise.

In the quiet homelife, showing love's bright ray,
More and more like Jesus living ev'ry day,
We may guide a dear one to the heav'nward way:
He that winneth souls is wise.

Out upon the highway, going forth with prayer,
For the lost and straying seeking ev'rywhere,
Close beside the Shepherd, we His joy may share:
He that winneth souls is wise.

Sow beside all waters, sow the gospel seed,
Here a word in season, there a loving deed;
Sinners to the Saviour be it ours to lead:
He that winneth souls is wise. 
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_took_my_place_and_died_for_me.php

A trembling soul, I sought the Lord,
My sin confessed, my guilt deplored;
How soft and sweet His word to me:
"I took thy place and died for thee."

Refrain:
No other hope, no other plea:
He took my place and died for me.
O precious Lamb of Calvary!
He took my place and died for me.

Here rests my heart; assurance sweet,
His blessed work He will complete,
Since in His love so great and free
He took my place and died for me.

When sorrow veils the smiling day,
When evil foes beset my way,
Abundant grace in Him I see;
He took my place and died for me.

No room for doubt, no room for fears,
When to my view the cross appears;
My joyful song shall ever be:
He took my place and died for me. 
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_was_slain_for_me.php

Hark how th'adoring hosts above
With songs surround the throne,
With songs surround the throne!
Ten thousand thousand are their tongues;
But all their hearts are one,
But all their hearts are one,
But all their hearts are one.

Worthy the Lamb that died, they cry,
To be exalted thus,
To be exalted thus;
Worthy the Lamb, our hearts reply,
For He was slain for us,
For He was slain for us,
For He was slain for us.

Thou hast redeemed us with Thy blood,
And set the pris'ners free,
And set the pris'ners free;
Thou mad'st us kings and priests to God,
And we shall reign with Thee,
And we shall reign with Thee,
And we shall reign with Thee.

To Him who sits upon the throne,
The God whom we adore,
The God whom we adore,
And to the Lamb that once was slain,
Be glory evermore,
Be glory evermore,
Be glory evermore. 

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_was_there_all_the_time.php

Time after time I was searching for peace in some void
I was trying to blame all my ills on this world I was in
Surface relationships used me till I was done in
But all the while someone was begging to free me from sin 

Chorus
He was there all the time
He was there all the time
Waiting patiently in line
He was there all the time 
Never again will I search for a fake rainbows end
Now that I’ve found the answer my life is just starting to rhyme
Sharing each new day with Him is a breath of fresh life
Oh what I've missed He's been waiting right here all the time 

Chorus
He was there all the time
He was there all the time
Waiting patiently in line
He was there all the time
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he_was_wounded_for_our_transgressions.php

He was wounded for our transgressions,
He bore our sins in His body on the tree;
For our guilt He gave us peace,
From our bondage gave release,
And with His stripes,
and with His stripes,
And with His stripes our souls are healed.

He was numbered among transgressors,
We did esteem Him forsaken by His God;
As our sacrifice He died,
That the law be satisfied,
And all our sin,
and all our sin,
And all our sin was laid on Him.

We had wandered, we all had wandered
Far from the fold of "the Shepherd of the sheep";
But He sought us where we were,
On the mountains bleak and bare,
And bro't us home,
and bro't us home,
And bro't us safely home to God.

Who can number His generation?
Who shall declare all the triumphs of His Cross?
Millions, dead, now live again,
Myriads follow in His train!
Victorious Lord,
victorious Lord,
Victorious Lord and coming King! 
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/head_of_thy_church_triumphant.php

Head of Thy Church triumphant,
We joyfully adore Thee;
Till Thou appear, Thy members here
Shall sing like those in glory.
We lift our hearts and voices
With blest anticipation,
And cry aloud, and give to God
The praise of our salvation.

While in affliction’s furnace,
And passing through the fire,
Thy love we praise, which knows our days,
And ever brings us nigher.
We clap our hands exulting
In Thine almighty favor;
The love divine which made us Thine
Shall keep us Thine for ever.

Thou dost conduct Thy people
Through torrents of temptation,
Nor will we fear, while Thou art near,
The fire of tribulation.
The world with sin and Satan
In vain our march opposes,
Through Thee we shall break through them all,
And sing the song of Moses.

By faith we see the glory
To which Thou shalt restore us,
The cross despise for that high prize
Which Thou hast set before us.
And if Thou count us worthy,
We each, as dying Stephen,
Shall see Thee stand at God’s right hand,
To take us up to Heaven.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/head_of_thy_church_whose_spirit_fills.php



Head of Thy church, whose Spirit fills
And flows through every faithful soul,
Unites in mystic love, and seals
Them one, and sanctifies the whole;

“Come, Lord," Thy glorious Spirit cries,
And souls beneath the altar groan;
“Come, Lord," the bride on earth replies,
“And perfect all our souls in one."

Pour out the promised gift on all,
Answer the universal “Come!"
The fullness of the Gentiles call,
And take thine ancient people home.

To Thee let all the nations flow,
Let all obey the Gospel word;
Let all their bleeding Savior know,
Filled with the glory of the Lord.

O for Thy truth and mercy’s sake
The purchase of Thy passion claim!
Thine heritage the Gentiles take,
And cause the world to know Thy Name.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heal_me_o_my_savior.php

Heal me, O my Savior, heal;
heal me, as I suppliant kneel;
heal me and my pardon seal.

Fresh the wounds that sin hath made;
hear the prayers I oft have prayed,
and in mercy send me aid.

Helpless, none can help me now;
cheerless, none can cheer but thou;
suppliant, Lord, to thee I bow.

Thou the true Physician art;
thou, O Christ, canst health impart,
binding up the bleeding heart.

Other comforters are gone;
thou canst heal and thou alone,
thou for all my sin atone.

Heal me then, my Savior, heal;
heal me, as I suppliant kneel;
to thy mercy I appeal.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hear_our_prayer.php

Hear our prayer, O heavenly Father,
ere we lay us down to sleep;
may thine angels, pure and holy,
round our bed their vigil keep.

Heavy though our sins, thy mercy
far outweighs them every one;
down before the cross we cast them,
trusting in thy help alone.

None can measure out thy patience
by the span of human thought;
none can bound the tender mercies
which thy holy Son has bought.

Pardon all our past transgressions,
give us strength for days to come;
guide and guard us with thy blessing
till thine angels bear us home.

Honor, glory, might, dominion,
to the Father and the Son,
with the everlasting Spirit,
while eternal ages run.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heal_us_emmanuel.php

Heal us, Emmanuel, hear our prayer
[originally, Heal us, Emmanuel, here we are]
We wait to feel Thy touch;
Deep wounded souls to Thee repair,
And Savior, we are such.

Our faith is feeble, we confess
We faintly trust Thy Word;
But wilt Thou pity us the less?
Be that far from Thee, Lord!

Remember him who once applied
With trembling for relief
“Lord, I believe," with tears he cried;
“O help my unbelief!"

She, too, who touched Thee in the press
And healing virtue stole,
Was answered, “Daughter, go in peace;
Thy faith has made thee whole."

Concealed amid the gathering throng,
She would have shunned Thy view;
And if her faith was firm and strong,
Had strong misgivings too.

Like her, with hopes and fears we come
To touch Thee if we may;
O send us not despairing home;
Send none unhealed away.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/healing_at_the_fountain.php

There is healing at the fountain,
Come and find it, weary soul,
There your sins may all be covered;
Jesus waits to make you whole.

Refrain

Oh the fountain! blessèd healing fountain!
I am glad ’tis flowing free;
Oh the fountain! precious, cleansing fountain!
Praise the Lord, it cleanseth me.

There is healing at the fountain,
Look to Jesus now and live,
At the cross lay down thy burden;
All thy wanderings He’ll forgive.

Refrain

There is healing at the fountain,
Precious fountain filled with blood;
Come, oh come, the Savior calls you,
Come and plunge beneath its flood.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/healing_in_jesus.php

There are some disappointments, there are times when we weep,
When those we love dearly have wounded us deep;
But there’s healing in Jesus, there’s a balm for each pain,
And the heart that’s been wounded can be made whole again. 

Refrain:
Yes, there’s healing in Jesus, there’s a balm for each pain,
And the heart that’s been broken can be made whole again. 

There are homes that are broken, there are hearts that are sore,
There are ties that are severed to unite nevermore;
But there’s healing in Jesus, there’s a balm for each pain,
And the heart that’s been broken can be made whole again. 

There are sins that have blackened both the heart and the name,
And stricken a mother with sorrow and shame;
But there’s healing in Jesus, there’s a balm for each pain,
And the heart that’s been blackened can be made white again. 

Is it true when we’ve fallen into pitfalls of sin
We must always be crippled, never soar high again?
No, there’s healing in Jesus, there’s a balm for each pain,
And the wing that’s been broken can now soar high again. 

There’s a mother that’s troubled with the cares of the home,
And wond’ring if ever a bright day will come;
But there’s healing in Jesus, there’s a balm for each pain,
And the heart that is heavy can be made light again.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/healing_in_your_wings.php

Healing in your wings, O Lord
Healing in your wings, Oh there is...
Healing in your wings O, Lord
Healing in your wings, Oh there is...

There is one thing you have spoken,
Two things I have heard
That you my God are loving
And my loving God is strong, and there is...

1999 Mercy/Vineyard Publishing
CCLI# 1596342
Album: Healing in Your Wings/Vineyard


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hear_and_answer_prayer.php

I am praying, blessèd Savior,
To be more and more like Thee;
I am praying that Thy Spirit
Like a dove may rest on me.

Refrain

Thou Who knowest all my weakness,
Thou Who knowest all my care,
While I plead each precious promise,
Hear, oh, hear and answer prayer.

I am praying, blessèd Savior,
For a faith so clear and bright
That its eye will see Thy glory
Through the deepest, darkest night.

Refrain

I am praying to be humbled
By the power of grace divine,
To be clothed upon with meekness,
And to have no will but Thine.

Refrain

I am praying, blessèd Savior,
And my constant prayer shall be
For a perfect consecration,
That shall make me more like Thee.

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hear_and_live.php

O weary heart, why seek in vain
The balm of rest from earth to gain,
While Jesus waits, your King to reign,
And all your sins forgive!

Refrain

Awake, arise! no more delay;
He calls you now—His voice obey!
The loving words He speaks today,
Oh hear, and you shall live!

He calls again; on Him believe,
His gift of grace thro’ faith receive;
Your truest Friend no longer grieve,
But haste your heart to give.

Refrain

To Jesus come, and at His feet
That precious Name with praise repeat;
Oh, trust Him now, and learn how sweet
The peace His love will give.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heart_and_mind_possessions_lord.php

Heart and mind, possessions, Lord,
I offer unto Thee;
All these were Thine, Lord;
Thou didst give them all to me.
Wondrous are Thy doings unto me.
Plans and my thoughts and everything I ever do
Are dependent on Thy will and love alone.
I commit my spirit unto Thee.

Heart and mind, possessions, Lord,
I offer unto Thee;
Thou art the Way, the Truth;
Thou art the Life.
Sinful, I commit myself unto Thee.
Jesus Christ is filling all the heart of me.
He can give me victory o’er all that threatens me.
Jesus Christ is filling all my heart.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/here_i_am.php

Here I am
In Your sanctuary
Here I am
In Your holy presence
To hear You 
My Lord, my Lord!

Here I am
Lord of lords
Here I am
In Your holy presence
For the love of You
My Lord, my Lord!

CHORUS

For You are the assurance
Of my future
You are my fortress
The Rock of my salvation
You are my strength
And my refuge
Here I am!


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hear_lord_the_voice_of_my_complaint.php

Hear, Lord, the voice of my complaint,
Preserve my life from fear;
Hide me from plotting enemies
And evil, crowding near.
The workers of iniquity,
Their deadly shafts prepare;
They aim at me their treacherous words;
O save me from their snare.

The wicked in their base designs
Grow arrogant and bold;
Conspiring secretly, they think
That God will not behold;
They search out more iniquity,
Their thoughts and plans are deep,
But God will smite, for He is near
His saints to guard and keep.

The wicked, by their sins o’ercome,
Shall soon be brought to shame;
The hand of God shall yet appear,
And all shall fear His Name.
The just shall triumph in the Lord,
Their trust shall be secure,
And endless glory then shall crown
The upright and the pure.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hear_me_o_father.php

O heav’nly Father, hear my supplication,
I bow before Thee in Thy congregation;
Humble and needy, seeking Thy salvation,
Hear Thou my prayer, O God!

Draw me, Redeemer, I would seek Thee solely,
Help me to cherish, love, obey Thee wholly,
Fully surrendered, live a life that’s holy,
Hear Thou my prayer, O God!

Dwell Thou, O Savior, in my heart forever,
Thou who hast promised nothing shall us sever,
Comfort and lead me, I would leave Thee never,
Hear Thou my prayer, O God.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hear_my_call.php

Light of all who come to Thee,
Let me now Thy glory see,
Shining down with beams divine,
Making glad this heart of mine.

Refrain

Hear my call, oh, hear my call,
Thou my Life, my all in all;
By Thy hand uphold me still,
With Thy love my spirit fill.

Hope of all who trust in Thee,
Thou Whose blood was shed for me,
Thro’ its healing power divine
Keep from sin this heart of mine.

Refrain

In Thy strength, and not my own,
This I ask before Thy throne,
Blessèd Lord, my faith increase,
Keep my soul in perfect peace.

Refrain

When on earth I close mine eyes,
When to life Thou bidst me rise,
To Thyself, Thou Friend divine,
Take, oh, take this heart of mine.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hear_my_words_o_gracious_lord.php

Hear my words, O gracious Lord,
To my thoughts attentive be;
Hear my cry, my King, my God,
I will make my prayer to Thee.

With the morning light, O Lord,
Thou shalt hear my voice arise,
And expectant I will bring
Prayer as morning sacrifice.

Thou art holy, O my God,
Thou delightest not in sin;
Evil shall not dwell with Thee,
Nor the proud Thy favor win.

In the fullness of Thy grace
To Thy house I will repair;
Bowing toward Thy holy place,
Lost in love I worship there.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hear_now_the_name.php

Hear now the Name I'm singing, here in this
Name revealing all of God's love and healing
Comes to you this hour. Open your heart receiving
Speak now this Name believing; Nothing beyond
conceiving, lies beyond His power
Refrain:

Name above all names, Jesus the Lord and King of Kings
His Name is Life, His Name is health for body, mind, and soul. Jesus the Name 
we're singing, In Jesus' Name we're bringing all of God's love and healing here 
to make you whole.

Pain and affliction bearing, frail is the
flesh we're wearing. Mankind this weakness sharing
Crying to be whole. Christ wore the stripes in sorrow
Paid all that we might borrow health for a 
bright tomorrow, body mind and soul

Heartache and mental anguish rip at the
soul, men languish. Hellish the sword now brandished
piercing human minds. Comes now the Lord of healing
Touched with our deepest feeling; Truth from His
lips is pealing, freeing humankind.

Thy Kingdom come this hour; Thy kingdom 
come with power. Pour forth Your love a shower
Drench our thirsty souls. Rule over sin and sickness
Strengthen our every weakness. Son, rise,
dispel all bleakness, come and make us whole

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hear_our_praises.php

May our homes be filled with dancing (filled with dancing)
May our streets be filled with joy (filled with joy)
May injustice bow to Jesus (bow to Jesus)
As the people turn and pray (turn to pray)

Chorus:
From the mountain (from the mountain) to the valley (to the valley)
Hear our praises (hear our praises) rise to You (they rise to You)
From the heavens (from the heavens) to the nations (to the nations)
Hear our singing (hear our singing) fill the air (it fills the air)

May your light shine in the darkness (in the darkness)
As we walk before the cross (before the cross)
May your glory fill the whole earth (fill the whole earth)
As the waters o'er the seas (waters o'er the seas)

Repeat Chorus (x2)

Hallelujah (hallelujah), hallelujah (hallelujah)
Hallelujah (hallelujah), hallelujah
Hallelujah (hallelujah), hallelujah (hallelujah)
Hallelujah (hallelujah), hallelujah (hallelujah)

Repeat Chorus (x2)

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hear_our_prayer.php

Hear our prayer, O heavenly Father,
ere we lay us down to sleep;
may thine angels, pure and holy,
round our bed their vigil keep.

Heavy though our sins, thy mercy
far outweighs them every one;
down before the cross we cast them,
trusting in thy help alone.

None can measure out thy patience
by the span of human thought;
none can bound the tender mercies
which thy holy Son has bought.

Pardon all our past transgressions,
give us strength for days to come;
guide and guard us with thy blessing
till thine angels bear us home.

Honor, glory, might, dominion,
to the Father and the Son,
with the everlasting Spirit,
while eternal ages run.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hear_our_prayer_o_heavenly_father.php
Christian 
lyrics online will lead you to thousands of lyrics to hymns, choruses, worship 
songs and gospel recordings. Free Christian hymn lyrics include popular hymns, 
both new and old, traditional and modern, as well as rare and hard-to-find 
hymns. We have been online since 2004 and have reached over 1 million people in 
over 150 countries worldwide. In 2007, this site became the largest Christian 
lyrics site on the entire internet. 

© 2011
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hear_sweet_voices_from_above.php

Hear sweet voices from above,
Fill thy hands and go with love,
To the weary as they wait, so late;
In the name of Christ your King,
Go and sweetly, sweetly sing,
Go and wipe their tears away, and pray.

Refrain

Happy voices ev’rywhere
Are like angels in the air.
’Twas for this that Jesus came,
There is music in His Name,
In the work He calleth you, be true.

Cups of water ye may bear,
And bring answer to your prayer;
Jesus led the multitude with good.
How the blind with opened eyes
Looked on Him with glad surprise!
Love may fix the eyes long dim on Him.

Refrain

Only tell the story how
Jesus comes to bless you now;
What you do for love is best confessed.
Go as Jesus went to them;
You may find perchance a gem,
Long to sparkle in His sight in light.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hear_the_blessed_savior_calling.php

Hear the blessed Savior calling the oppressed,
“O ye heavy laden, come to Me and rest.
Come, no longer tarry, I your load will bear,
Bring Me every burden, bring Me every care."

Refrain

Come unto Me, I will give you rest;
Take My yoke upon you, hear Me and be blessed.
I am meek and lowly, come and trust My might.
Come, My yoke is easy, and My burden’s light.

Are you disappointed, wandering here and there,
Dragging chains of doubt and loaded down with care?
Do unholy feelings struggle in your breast?
Bring your case to Jesus—He will give you rest.

Refrain

Stumbling on the mountains dark with sin and shame,
Stumbling toward the pit of hell’s consuming flame.
By the powers of sin deluded and oppressed,
Hear the tender Shepherd, “Come to Me and rest."

Refrain

Have you by temptation often conquered been,
Has a sense of weakness brought distress within?
Christ will sanctify you, if you’ll claim His best.
In the Holy Spirit, He will give you rest.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hear_the_call.php

Lo! the day of God is breaking;
See the gleaming from afar!
Sons of earth from slumber waking,
Hail the Bright and Morning Star.

Refrain

Hear the call! O gird your armor on,
Grasp the Spirit’s mighty sword:
Take the helmet of salvation,
Pressing on to battle for the Lord!

Trust in Him Who is your Captain;
Let no heart in terror quail;
Jesus leads the gath’ring legions,
In His Name we shall prevail.

Refrain

Onward marching, firm and steady,
Faint not, fear not Satan’s frown,
For the Lord is with you always,
Till you wear the victor’s crown.

Refrain

Conq’ring hosts with banners waving,
Sweeping on o’er hill and plain,
Ne’er shall halt till swells the anthem,
“Christ o’er all the world doth reign!"

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hear_the_chiming_easter_bells.php

Hear the chiming Easter bells,
Their joyous music ringing;
Hear the children’s happy voices,
Easter carols singing.

Ringing, ringing, singing, singing,
Easter bells and happy voices;
Christ arose on Easter day,
And all the world rejoices,
And all the world rejoices.

Angels came from Heav’n above
To tell the wondrous story:
“Christ is risen from the dead,
The Lord of life and glory."


“Seek Him not among the dead,
The grave is not His prison;
Go and His disciples tell,
That Christ the Lord is risen."


Christ the Lord is ris’n today,
Salvation to us bringing;
Easter bells, ring out your chimes,
While voices glad are singing.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hear_the_cry.php

O’er the ocean’s rolling waters,
From an eastern land today,
Comes a cry from heathen daughters,
“Save us ere we’re lost for aye";
Loud we hear their voices crying,
Borne upon each floating breeze,
For their souls in sin are dying,
While we idly wait at ease. 

Refrain:
Who will go, oh, who will go,
Bear the message o’er the sea?
Oh, who will go? 

Home and friends to us seem nearer,
As we hear their pleading cry;
Native land seems even dearer—
Still in tears they moan and sigh;
“Will not someone leave his nation?
You are saved, but we are lost!"
Jesus died for all creation—
Who will come at any cost? 

“Though your home and friends you cherish,
Will you not regard the cries
From the lips of those who perish,
As they rend the vaulted skies;
Many come with sect confusion,
Who themselves are in the night,
Bringing only more delusion;
Who will bring the gospel light?" 

Go, my brother, o’er the ocean,
Leave behind all earthly dross;
Prove to God thy life’s devotion,
Lift the banner of His cross;
Jesus left His home in glory,
Died to set the captives free;
Go and tell the wondrous story,
Bear the message o’er the sea. 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hear_the_everlasting_song.php

Hear the everlasting song,
Breaking thro’ the sky:
“Glory, glory be to God,
To God on high!"
Thro’ the blessèd courts of light
Saints and angels, joyful singing,
Strike their harps and shout aloud,
“The Lord is King!"

Hear the loud triumphant song,
O’er the world resound:
Like a mighty ocean rolls
The glad, glad sound:
“Hallelujah! praise the Lord!"
Distant climes His triumph singing,
Lift their voice and shout aloud,
“The Lord is King!"

Praise the blessèd Three in One,
All ye heav’nly host:
Praise the Father, praise the Son,
And Holy Ghost!
As it was in all the past,
Through eternal ages ringing,
Ransomed ones shall still proclaim,
“The Lord is King!"

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hear_the_heralds_of_the_gospel.php

Sinners, will you scorn the message
Sent in mercy from above?
Every sentence, O how tender!
Every line is full of love:
Listen to it, listen to it,
Every line is full of love.

Hear the heralds of the Gospel
News from Zion’s King proclaim:
“Pardon to each rebel sinner,
Free forgiveness in His Name":
How important, how important,
“Free forgiveness in His Name."

Tempted souls, they bring you succor;
Fearful hearts, they quell your fears,
And, with news of consolation,
Chase away the falling tears:
Tender heralds, tender heralds,
Chase away the falling tears.

O ye angels, hovering round us,
Waiting spirits, speed your way;
Haste ye to the court of heaven,
Tidings bear without delay,
Rebel sinners, rebel sinners,
Glad the message will obey.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hear_the_wail.php

Hear the wail across the sea
Comes from millions unto thee—
Weary ones who might be free
Did they but know of Calvary.

Refrain

Wailing, wailing o’er the sea;
Wailing, wailing unto thee;
Wailing, wailing to be free;
Go, tell them all of Calvary.

Wailing of the prophet cursed,
Of fanatics, wildest, worst,
Help us, Lord, their chains to burst,
And set them free by Calvary.

Refrain

Wailings reach this favored shore,
Wailings ceasing nevermore;
Men are dying evermore;
Go, tell them all of Calvary.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hear_this_all_ye_people_hear.php

Hear this, all ye people, hear,
Earth’s inhabitants, give ear;
All of high and low degree,
Rich and poor, give heed to me.

Truth with all my heart I seek,
And my mouth shall wisdom speak;
Hearken while in lyric strain
I make hidden wisdom plain.

Why should I to fear give way
When I see the evil day,
When with wickedness my foes
Shall surround me and oppose?

They that trust in treasured gold,
Though they boast of wealth untold,
None can bid his brother live,
None to God a ransom give.

If from death one would be free
And corruption never see,
Costly is life’s ransom price,
Far beyond all sacrifice.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hear_us_heavenly_father.php

Hear us, Heav’nly Father,
Thou Whose gentle care
Tends the young and feeble,
Hear our simple prayer!
Hear our prayer!
Father, hear!

Pardon our offenses,
Guard us from all ill;
Make us, like true children,
Love Thy holy will.
Hear our prayer!
Father, hear!

Let not sin beguile us
From Thy paths to stay;
But with Thy great mercy
Keep us night and day.
Hear our prayer!
Father, hear!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hear_us_o_lord.php

Hear us, O Lord, from Heaven Thy dwelling place:
Like them of old, in vain we toil all night,
Unless with us Thou go, Who art the Light,
Come then, O Lord, that we may see Thy face.

Thou, Lord, doest rule the raging of the sea,
When loud the storm and furious is the gale:
Strong is Thine arm; our little barques are frail:
Send us Thy help; remember Galilee.

Our wives and children we commend to Thee:
For them we plough the land and plough the deep;
For them by day the golden corn we reap,
By night the silver harvest of the sea.

We thank Thee, Lord, for sunshine, dew and rain,
Broadcast from heaven by Thine almighty hand—
Source of all life, unnumbered as the sand—
Bird, beast, and fish, herb, fruit and golden grain.

O Bread of Life, Thou in Thy Word hast said,
Who feeds in faith on Me shall never die!
In mercy hear Thy hungry children’s cry—
Father, give us this day our daily bread!

Sow in our hearts the seeds of Thy dear love,

That we may reap contentment, joy, and peace;
And when at last our earthly labors cease,
Grant us to join Thy harvest home above.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hear_us_o_savior.php

Hear us, O Savior, when we pray,
Humbly our need confessing;
Grant us the promised show’rs today—
Send them upon us, O Lord!

Refrain

Send show’rs of blessing;
Send show’rs refreshing;
Send showers of blessing;
Send them, Lord, we pray!

Knowing Thy love, on Thee we call,
Boldly Thy throne addressing;
Pleading that show’rs of grace may fall—
Send them upon us, O Lord!

Refrain

Trusting Thy Word that cannot fail,
Master we claim Thy promise;
Oh that our faith may now prevail—
Send us the showers, O Lord!

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hear_what_glorious_song_of_angels.php

Hear what glorious song of angels
Is now ringing through the air;
Never valley, never mountain
Heard an anthem half so fair.

Refrain

Hallelujah, hallelujah
Is the jubilant refrain;
God is sending us a Savior,
Peace on earth, good will to man.

Messengers of God’s free mercy
Are now seen by human eye;
Shepherds hear the wondrous message:
“Glory be to God on high."

Refrain

Let us also sing the praises
Of our God so full of love,
Who on Christmas sent a Savior,
Sent a Savior from above.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hear_what_god_the_lord_hath_spoken.php

Hear what God the Lord hath spoken,
“O my people, faint and few,
Comfortless, afflicted, broken,
Fair abodes I build for you:
Themes of heartfelt tribulation
Shall no more perplex your ways;
You shall name your walls, Salvation,
And your gates shall all be praise.

“There, like streams that feed the garden,
Pleasures, without end, shall flow,
For the Lord, your faith rewarding,
All His bounty shall bestow;
Still in undisturbed possession
Peace and righteousness shall reign;
Never shall you feel oppression,
Hear the voice of war again.

“Ye no more your suns descending,
Waning moons no more shall see;
But your griefs forever ending,
Find eternal noon in Me:
God shall rise, and shining o’er you,
Change to day the gloom of night;
He, the Lord, shall be your Glory,
God your everlasting Light."

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hear_what_the_voice_from_heaven_proclaims.php

Hear what the voice from heaven proclaims
for all the pious dead;
sweet is the savor of their names,
and soft their sleeping bed.

They die in Jesus and are blest;
how kind their slumbers are;
from sufferings and from sins released,
and freed from every snare.

Far from this world of toil and strife,
they're present with the Lord;
the labors of their mortal life
end in a large reward.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hear_ye_the_masters_call.php

Hear ye the Master’s call, “Give Me thy best!"
For, be it great or small, that is His test.
Do then the best you can, not for reward,
Not for the praise of men, but for the Lord.

Refrain

Every work for Jesus will be blest,
But He asks from everyone his best.
Our talents may be few, these may be small,
But unto Him is due our best, our all.

Wait not for men to laud, heed not their slight;
Winning the smile of God brings its delight!
Aiding the good and true ne’er goes unblest,
All that we think or do, be it the best.

Refrain

Night soon comes on apace, day hastens by;
Workman and work must face testing on high.
Oh, may we in that day find rest, sweet rest,
Which God has promised those who do their best.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hear_and_live.php

O weary heart, why seek in vain
The balm of rest from earth to gain,
While Jesus waits, your King to reign,
And all your sins forgive!

Refrain

Awake, arise! no more delay;
He calls you now—His voice obey!
The loving words He speaks today,
Oh hear, and you shall live!

He calls again; on Him believe,
His gift of grace thro’ faith receive;
Your truest Friend no longer grieve,
But haste your heart to give.

Refrain

To Jesus come, and at His feet
That precious Name with praise repeat;
Oh, trust Him now, and learn how sweet
The peace His love will give.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hear_lord_the_voice_of_my_complaint.php

Hear, Lord, the voice of my complaint,
Preserve my life from fear;
Hide me from plotting enemies
And evil, crowding near.
The workers of iniquity,
Their deadly shafts prepare;
They aim at me their treacherous words;
O save me from their snare.

The wicked in their base designs
Grow arrogant and bold;
Conspiring secretly, they think
That God will not behold;
They search out more iniquity,
Their thoughts and plans are deep,
But God will smite, for He is near
His saints to guard and keep.

The wicked, by their sins o’ercome,
Shall soon be brought to shame;
The hand of God shall yet appear,
And all shall fear His Name.
The just shall triumph in the Lord,
Their trust shall be secure,
And endless glory then shall crown
The upright and the pure.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hear_from_heaven.php

We are your people 
Called by your Name 
We humble ourselves and pray 

We are your people 
Called by your Name 
We humble ourselves and pray 
We turn from our sin 
And come to seek your face 

Hear from heaven 
And forgive our wicked ways 
Hear from heaven 
And heal our land today 

©2004 Integrity's Hosanna! Music 
CCLI #1596342
Album: Today/Brian Doerksen

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heard_the_word.php

Come, for all is ready, and the feast is spread,
Come, for Jesus offers you the living Bread,
Hear His invitation, ’mid the toil and strife,
Come, and take the gift of life.

Refrain

Hear the word,
All may come,
Without price,
Come and take eternal life.

Gospel bells are ringing, hear the echo sweet,
Calling in the wand’ring to the Savior’s feet,
Heed the tender message, seek the great reward,
Hear the voice of Christ your Lord.

Refrain

Welcome, ever welcome to the feast of love,
Whosoever will, may see His face above,
Hark, with hallelujahs, how the high courts ring,
Come, and crown the Savior King.

Refrain

You who know how precious is His grace so free,
Take the gift of life yet more abundantly.
Spread the invitation, there is room for all,
Sound abroad the loving call.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hearken_o_lord.php

Hearken, O Lord, have mercy upon us, for we have sinned against thee.

To thee, Redeemer, King of highest heaven,
Lift we our eyes in grief and deep abasement:
Listen, O Saviour, to our supplications.

Head of the Corner, right hand of the Father,
Way of salvation, gate of life eternal,
Wash thou away the stain of our offences.

Lord, we beseech thee, from thy throne of glory
Bow down thine ear to hear our cry of sorrow,
Look down in mercy on our sore transgressions.

All our misdoings now we lay before thee,
Unveil with contrite heart each guilty secret:
Saviour, in pity grant us thy forgiveness.

Guiltless, a captive taken unresisting,
By false accusers brought to condemnation,
Save, Lord, and help the souls thou hast redeemed.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hearken_to_the_solemn_voice.php

Hearken to the solemn voice, the awful midnight cry;
Waiting souls, rejoice, rejoice, and see the Bridegroom nigh;
Lo! He comes to keep His Word, light and joy His looks impart;
Go ye forth to meet your Lord, and meet Him in your heart.

Ye who faint beneath the load of sin, your heads lift up;
See your great redeeming God, He comes, and bids you hope:
In the midnight of your grief, Jesus doth His mourners cheer;
Lo! He brings you sure relief; believe, and feel Him here.

Ye whose loins are girt, stand forth! Whose lamps are burning bright,
Worthy, in your Savior’s worth, to walk with Him in white:
Jesus bids your hearts be clean, bids you all His promise prove;
Jesus comes to cast out sin, and perfect you in love.

Wait we all in patient hope, till Christ, the Judge, shall come,
We shall soon be all caught up to meet the general doom:
In an hour to us unknown, as a thief in deepest night,
Christ shall suddenly come down, with all His saints in light.

Happy he whom Christ shall find watching to see Him come;
Him the Judge of all mankind shall bear triumphant home:
Who can answer to His Word? Which of you dares meet His day?
“Rise, and come to judgment!"—Lord, we rise, and come away.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hearken_all_what_holy_singing.php

Hearken, all! what holy singing
Now is sounding from the sky!
’Tis a hymn with grandeur ringing,
Sung by voices clear and high.

Refrain

Gloria in excelsis Deo,
Gloria in excelsis Deo.

On the plain, the simple shepherds
Watched their flocks the long night through;
From on high they heard the voices,
Sounding through the heavenly blue.

Refrain

See, within the manger lowly,
Wide the Christ Child spreads His arms.
Raise to Him your joyful voices,
Sing we all Noel, Noel.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heart_and_mind_possessions_lord.php

Heart and mind, possessions, Lord,
I offer unto Thee;
All these were Thine, Lord;
Thou didst give them all to me.
Wondrous are Thy doings unto me.
Plans and my thoughts and everything I ever do
Are dependent on Thy will and love alone.
I commit my spirit unto Thee.

Heart and mind, possessions, Lord,
I offer unto Thee;
Thou art the Way, the Truth;
Thou art the Life.
Sinful, I commit myself unto Thee.
Jesus Christ is filling all the heart of me.
He can give me victory o’er all that threatens me.
Jesus Christ is filling all my heart.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heart_of_jesus_all_for_thee.php

Life on earth is all a warfare,
Foes within and foes without,
Jesus! Jesus, lo! the tempter
Flees before that battle shout;
In the fierce unceasing combats,
Let our tranquil warcry be.

Omnia pro Te Cor Jesu,
Heart of Jesus, all for Thee,
Omnia pro Te Cor Jesu,
Heart of Jesus, all for Thee.

All, yes, all, I would not pilfer
From my holocaust apart,
Ev'ry thought, word, deed and feeling,
Ev'ry beating of my heart,
Thine till death, and Thine forever,
My heart's cry in heav'n shall be.

Omnia pro Te Cor Jesu,
Heart of Jesus, all for Thee,
Omnia pro Te Cor Jesu,
Heart of Jesus, all for Thee.

This will nerve the arm that's weary,
This will dry the tear that steals,
This will soothe the wasting anguish
That the heart in secret feels.
Ever in my soul 'twill slumber,
Often to my lips 'twill start,

Omnia pro Te Cor Jesu,
Heart of Jesus, all for Thee,
Omnia pro Te Cor Jesu,
Heart of Jesus, all for Thee.

All things, all things, hard and easy,
High and low, and bright and dark,
Naught too poor for me to offer,
Not to small for Thee to mark,
Health and sickness, rest and labor,
Joy's keen thrill, and grief's keen smart,

Omnia pro Te Cor Jesu,
Heart of Jesus, all for Thee,
Omnia pro Te Cor Jesu,
Heart of Jesus, all for Thee.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heart_of_jesus_meek_and_mild.php



Heart of Jesus meek and mild,
Hear, oh hear thy feeble child,
When the tempest's most severe,
Heart of Jesus hear.

Sweetly we'll rest on thy Sacred Heart,
Never from Thee, oh, let us part,
Hear then thy loving children's pray'r,
Heart of Jesus hear.

Make me Jesus wholly thine,
Change this wayward heart of mine,
Lead me through this world so drear,
Heart of Jesus hear!

Sweetly we'll rest on thy Sacred Heart,
Never from Thee, oh, let us part,
Hear then thy loving children's pray'r,
Heart of Jesus hear.

When I draw my latest breath,
When my eyes shall close in death,
Then sweet Jesus be Thou near,
Heart of Jesus hear!

Sweetly we'll rest on thy Sacred Heart,
Never from Thee, oh, let us part,
Hear then thy loving children's pray'r,
Heart of Jesus hear.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heart_of_worship.php

When the music fades
And all is stripped away and I simply come
Longing just to bring something that's of worth
That will bless your heart

I'll bring you more than a song for a song in itself
Is not what you have required. You search much deeper within
Through the way things appear. You're looking into my heart

I'm coming back to the heart of worship
And it's all about you, all about you, Jesus
I'm sorry, Lord, for the thing I've made it
When it's all about you, all about you, Jesus

King of endless worth, no one could express
How much you deserve. Though I'm weak and poor
All I have is yours, every single breath

© 1999 Kingsway's Thankyou Music
CCLI# 1596342
Album: I Could Sing of Your Love Forever

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hearts_to_heaven_and_voices_raise.php

Alleluia, alleluia! Hearts to Heaven and voices raise:
Sing to God a hymn of gladness, sing to God a hymn of praise.
He, who on the cross a Victim, for the world’s salvation bled,
Jesus Christ, the King of glory, now is risen from the dead.

Now the iron bars are broken, Christ from death to life is born,
Glorious life, and life immortal, on the holy Easter morn.
Christ has triumphed, and we conquer by His mighty enterprise:
We with Him to life eternal by His resurrection rise.

Christ is risen, Christ, the first fruits of the holy harvest field,
Which will all its full abundance at His second coming yield:
Then the golden ears of harvest will their heads before Him wave,
Ripened by His glorious sunshine from the furrows of the grave.

Christ is risen, we are risen! Shed upon us heavenly grace,
Rain and dew and gleams of glory from the brightness of Thy face;
That we, with our hearts in Heaven, here on earth may fruitful be,
And by angel hands be gathered, and be ever, Lord, with Thee.

Alleluia, alleluia! Glory be to God on high;
Alleluia! to the Savior who has gained the victory;
Alleluia! to the Spirit, fount of love and sanctity:
Alleluia, alleluia! to the Triune Majesty.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heaven.php

It's just a matter of time... Oooo yeah. Oooo yeah. Ooooo yeah

Chorus:
I'm singin now Heaven, Heaven, woh, it's a beautiful place
Singin now Heaven, Heaven, woh, it's a beautiful place

With the streets of gold and the crystal sea
God has made a place for you and me
Singin Heaven, Heaven, woh, its a beautiful place

And one of these days I'm gonna walk with God
He's gonna tell me about the things that I never saw
Singin Heaven, Heaven, woh it's a beautiful place

Well the time on Earth it seems so long
Things we go through they seem so wrong
But if we hang on long and hold on tight
God is gonna keep us deep in His sight

Oooo yeah. Oooo yeah
Oh, I want to see Him, look upon His face
I'm gonna live with him forever, 'cause Heaven is a beautiful place!
This world is not our home, we're just a passing through
And someday I'll live in Heaven, 'cause our lives have all been made new!

Repeat Chorus

With the streets of gold and the crystal sea
God has made a place for you and me
Singin Heaven, Heaven, woh, its a beautiful place

Well the time on Earth it seems so long,
Things we go through they seem so wrong
But if we hang on long and hold on tight
God is gonna keep us deep in His sight

Those pearly gates they're gonna open wide
And all the Christians gonna step inside
So come on, brother, and keep your faith
Live your life in Jesus' name!

Kick it... Oooo yeah. Ooooo yeah

I'm singin now Heaven
Woa, I'm singing Heaven, I'm singing Heaven

I'm singing bout Heaven (repeat with lead insertions and fade)

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heaven2.php

Gotta keep, keep the faith (x8)

Chorus:
I'm singin 'bout Heaven (I'm singin 'bout Heaven), Heaven, oh, it's a beautiful 
place (I'm singin 'bout Heaven)
Singin 'bout Heaven (I'm singin 'bout Heaven), Heaven, oh, it's a beautiful 
place (I'm singin 'bout Heaven)
With the streets of gold and the crystal sea (streets of gold)
God has made a place for you and me
Singin Heaven (I'm singin 'bout Heaven), Heaven, woh, its a beautiful place (I'm 
singin 'bout Heaven)

And one day I'm gonna walk with God (walk with God)
He's gonna tell me about the things that I never saw
Singin Heaven (I'm singin 'bout Heaven), Heaven, oh it's a beautiful place

Gotta keep, keep the faith (x4)

Oh, I want to see Him, look upon His face
And with him forever, 'cause Heaven is a beautiful place
This world is not our home, we're just a passing through
And someday I'll live in Heaven, 'cause our lives have all been made new

Repeat Chorus

Well the time on Earth it seems so long
Things we go through they seem so wrong (seems wrong)
But if we hang on long and hold on tight
God is gonna keep us deep in His sight (You know we gotta hold on tight)
Those pearly gates they're gonna open wide
And all the Christians gonna step inside
Gotta keep, keep the faith
Live your life in Jesus' name (Gotta keep the faith)

Gotta keep, keep the faith (x12)

Repeat Chorus

And one day I'm gonna walk with God (walk with God)
He's gonna tell me about the things that I never saw
Singin Heaven (I'm singin 'bout Heaven), Heaven, oh it's a beautiful place

The Lord has promised me heaven and that's where I want to be
And if you feel the same way, come on and jam with AVB
(Kick it Steve...)
I'm singing 'bout Heaven (Heaven)
'Bout Heaven (Heaven)
'Bout Heaven (Heaven)
It's a beautiful place
(Take it to the Max...)
Heaven (Heaven) Heaven (oh yeah)
Heaven (Heaven)
It's a beautiful place
(Brishan...)
I'm Singin' Heaven (Heaven)
Heaven (Heaven)
Heaven (Heaven)
It's a beautiful place
(Alright, I gotta step up here)
I'm Singin' Heaven (Heaven)
Heaven (Heaven)
Heaven yeah (Heaven yeah)
It's a beautiful place
(Check this out, JG)
Oh Heaven (Heaven)
Heaven (Heaven)
Sing this song...
The purpose of this rhyme is to say that its just a matter of time until we see 
heaven
(Heaven, Heaven, Heaven)
Oh yeah, It's a beautiful place

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heaven_and_earth_and_sea_and_air.php

Heaven and earth, and sea and air,
All their Maker’s praise declare;
Wake, my soul, awake and sing:
Now thy grateful praises bring.

See the glorious orb of day
Breaking through the clouds his way;
Moon and stars with silvery light
Praise Him through the silent night.

See how He hath everywhere
Made this earth so rich and fair;
Hill and vale and fruitful land,
All things living, show His hand.

Lord, great wonders workest Thou!
To Thy sway all creatures bow;
Write Thou deeply in my heart
What I am, and what Thou art.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heaven_came_down.php

Oh, what a wonderful wonderful day
Day I will never forget
After I wandered in darkness away
Jesus my savior I met
O what a tender compassionate friend,
He met the need of my heart,
Shadows dispelling, with joy I am telling
He made all the darkness depart.

Heaven came down and glory filled my soul
When at the cross the Savior made me whole
My sins He washed away, and my night He turned to day,
Heaven came down and glory filled my soul.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heaven_is_here_where_hymns_of_gladness.php

Heaven is here, where hymns of gladness
Cheer the toilers’ rugged way,
In this world where clouds of sadness
Often change to night our day;
Heaven is here, where misery lightened
Of its heavy load is seen,
Where the face of sorrow brightened,
By the deed of love hath been.

Where the sad, the poor, despairing,
Are uplifted, cheered, and blest,
Where in others’ labors sharing,
We can find our surest rest;
Where we heed the voice of duty,
Tread the path that Jesus trod;
This is Heaven, its peace, its beauty,
Radiant with the love of God.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heaven_is_in_my_heart.php

Chorus 1:
Ooooo...Heaven is in my heart
Ooooo...Heaven is in my heart 
Repeat Chorus 1 

Chorus 2:
(Everybody sing) Ooooo...Heaven is in my heart
(Can't you feel it?) Ooooo...Heaven is in my heart 

The kingdom of our Lord is here
Heaven is in my heart
The presence of his majesty
Heaven is in my heart 

Chorus 3:
(C'mon and sing along) Ooooo...Heaven is in my heart
(Do you believe it?) Ooooo...Heaven is in my heart 

In His presence joy abounds
Heaven is in my heart
The light of Holiness surrounds
Heaven is in my heart 

Chorus 4:
(I like to sing it) Ooooo...Heaven is in my heart
(Do you believe it?) Ooooo...Heaven is in my heart 

We are a temple of the Lord
Heaven is in my heart
We worship Him in one accord
Heaven is in my heart 

Chorus 5:
Ooooo...Heaven is in my heart (in my heart)
(Can't you feel it in my heart?) Ooooo...Heaven is in my heart 

Chorus 6:
(Can you feel it, can you feel it, can you feel it, can you feel it?) Ooooo...Heaven 
is in my heart (in my heart)
Ooooo...Heaven is in my heart 

Chorus 7:
Ooooo...Heaven is in my heart (in my heart)
(Can you feel it, can you feel it, can't you feel it in my heart?) Ooooo...Heaven 
is in my heart 

Chorus 8:
Ooooo...Heaven is in my heart (in my heart)
Ooooo...Heaven is in my heart 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heaven_will_be_my_home.php

When I think about my troubles and my trials in life's way (they can't be right)
The darkness of this world just can't be right
There's a new day coming closer with each day
A new land's within my sight 

I know that my sins are all forgiven (I know they are forgiven)
I know that He watches o'er my life (I know He watches o'er my life)
But when I think of being alone it makes me want to go (when I think of, it 
makes me want to)
To the place that's free from grief and strife (free from strife) 

Chorus:
Heaven's gonna be (Heaven will be), gonna be my home
From my God I nevermore will roam (roam)
(Walking with Him) Walking with Him (I'll never) I'll never be alone
(Whenever) Heaven will be my home 

When I come to the ending of this journey here on earth (a crown of life)
A promised crown of life is my reward
There's a city promised from my second birth
I'm going to meet my Lord 

I know that my life on earth on is passing (I know that my life is passing)
I know that my visit here is brief (I know that visit here is brief)
But when I think of living with Him my heart begins to yearn (when I think of 
living with Him)
For the place of comfort and relief (relief, relief) 

Heaven's gonna be (Heaven will be), gonna be my home
From my God I nevermore will roam (roam)
(Walking with Him) Walking with Him (I'll never) I'll never be alone
(Whenever) 

Repeat Chorus 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heavenly_chorus.php

Listen to the heav地ly music
Made by those who never tire,
Wondrous song that has no ending,
Sung by all the angel choir. 

Refrain:
They are singing, ever singing,
Over on the other shore;
Soon we値l join them in the chorus,
When this fleeting life is o弾r. 

Soon we値l join the choir of glory,
Soon we値l greet those gone before;
Yes, we値l meet departed loved ones,
Meet where parting is no more. 

There we値l sing, our sorrow over,
On that fair and happy shore,
Where the wicked cease from troubling,
And the weary sigh no more. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heavenly_father_bless_me_now.php

Heavenly Father, bless me now;
At the cross of Christ I bow;
Take my guilt and grief away;
Hear and heal me now, I pray.

Now, O Lord, this very hour,
Send Thy grace and show Thy power;
While I rest upon Thy Word;
Come, and bless me now, O Lord.

Mercy now, O Lord, I plead
In this hour of utter need;
Turn me not away unblest;
Calm my anguish into rest.

O Thou loving, blessèd One,
Rising o’er me like the sun,
Light and life art Thou within;
Savior, Thou, from every sin!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heavenly_father_send_thy_blessing.php

Heav’nly Father, send Thy blessing
On Thy children gathered here,
May they all, Thy Name confessing,
Be to Thee forever dear;
May they be, like Joseph, loving,
Dutiful, and chaste, and pure;
And their faith, like David, proving,
Steadfast unto death endure.

Holy Savior, Who in meekness
Didst vouchsafe a Child to be,
Guide their steps, and help their weakness,
Bless and make them like to Thee;
Bear Thy lambs, when they are weary,
In Thine arms and at Thy breast;
Through life’s desert, dry and dreary,
Bring them to Thy heav’nly rest.

Spread Thy golden pinions o’er them,
Holy Spirit, from above,
Guide them, lead them, go before them,
Give them peace, and joy, and love;
Thy true temples, Holy Spirit,
May they with Thy glory shine,
And immortal bliss inherit,
And forevermore be Thine.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heavenly_father_sovereign_lord.php

Heavenly Father, sovereign Lord,
Ever faithful to Thy word,
Humbly we our seal set to,
Testify that Thou art true.
Lo! for us the wilds are glad,
All in cheerful green arrayed,
Opening sweets they all disclose,
Bud and blossom as the rose.

Hark! the wastes have found a voice,
Lonely deserts now rejoice,
Gladsome hallelujahs sing,
All around with praises ring.
Lo! abundantly they bloom,
Lebanon is hither come,
Carmel’s stores the heavens dispense,
Sharon’s fertile excellence.

See, these barren souls of ours
Bloom, and put forth fruits and flowers,
Flowers of Eden, fruits of grace,
Peace, and joy, and righteousness.
We behold (the abjects we!)
Christ, the incarnate Deity,
Christ, in whom Thy glories shine,
Excellence of strength divine.

Ye that tremble at his frown,
He shall lift your hands cast down;
Christ, who all your weakness sees,
He shall prop your feeble knees.
Ye of fearful hearts, be strong;
Jesus will not tarry long;
Fear not lest his truth should fail,
Jesus is unchangeable.

God, your God, shall surely come,
Quell your foes, and seal their doom,
He shall come and save you too;
We, O Lord, have found thee true!
Blind we were, but now we see,
Deal; we hearken now to thee,
Dumb, for thee our tongues employ,
Lame, and, lo! we leap for joy.

Faint we were, and parched with drought,
Water at Thy word gushed out,
Streams of grace our thirst repress,
Starting from the wilderness;
Still we gasp Thy grace to know,
Here for ever let it flow,
Make the thirsty land a pool;
Fix the Spirit in our soul.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Version by Benjamin Williams, alt.

Heavenly Father, sovereign Lord,
Be Thy glorious Name adored!
Lord, Thy mercies never fail;
Hail, celestial Goodness, hail!

Though unworthy of Thine ear,
Deign our humble songs to hear;
Purer praise we hope to bring,
When around Thy throne we sing.

While on earth ordained to stay,
Guide our footsteps in Thy way,
Till we come to dwell with Thee,
Till we all Thy glory see.

When, with angel harps again,
We will wake a nobler strain;
There, in joyful songs of praise,
Our triumphant songs we raise.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Original version (omitting repetitions):

Grateful notes and numbers bring;
While Jehovah’s praise we sing:
Holy, holy, holy, Lord!
Be Thy glorious name adored.

Men on earth, and saints above,
Sing the great Redeemer’s love:
Lord, Thy mercies never fail!
Hail, celestial goodness, hail!

Though unworthy, Lord, Thine ear,
Our humble hallelujahs hear;
Purer praise hope to bring
When with saints we stand and sing.

Lead us to that blissful state,
Where Thou reignest supremely great;
Look with pity from Thy throne,
And send Thy Holy Spirit down.

While on earth ordained to stay
Guide our footsteps in Thy way;
Till we come to reign with Thee,
And all Thy glorious greatness see.

Then with angels we’ll again
Wake a louder, louder strain;
There, in joyful songs of praise,
We’ll our grateful voices raise.

There no tongue shall silent be:
There all shall join sweet harmony;
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heavenly_father_we_beseech_thee.php

Heavenly Father, we beseech Thee,
Grant Thy blessing ere we part;
Take us in Thy care and keeping,
Guard from evil every heart.

Refrain

Bless the words we here have spoken,
Offered prayer and cheerful strain;
If Thy will, O Lord, we pray Thee,
Grant we all may meet again.

Loving Savior, go Thou with us,
Be our Comfort and our Stay;
Grateful praise to Thee we render
For the joy we feel today.

Refrain

Holy Spirit, dwell within us,
May our souls Thy temple be;
May we tread the path to glory,
Led and guided still by Thee.

Refrain

Heavenly Father, loving Savior,
Holy Spirit, Three in One,
As among Thy saints and angels,
So on earth Thy will be done.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heavenly_father_we_thy_children.php

Heav’nly Father, we Thy children,
Gathered round our risen Lord,
Lift our hearts in earnest pleading:
Oh, revive us by Thy Word!

Refrain

Send refreshing, send refreshing,
From Thy presence, gracious Lord!
Send refreshing, send refreshing,
And revive us by Thy Word!

Gracious gales of heav’nly blessing
In Thy love to us afford;
Let us feel Thy Spirit’s presence,
Oh, revive us by Thy Word!

Refrain

Weak and weary in the conflict,
“Wrestling not with flesh and blood,"
Help us, Lord, as faint we falter,
Oh, revive us by Thy Word!

Refrain

With Thy strength, O Master, gird us;
Be our Guide, and be our Guard:
Fill us with Thy Holy Spirit;
Oh, revive us by Thy Word!

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heavenly_lord_i_appreciate_you.php

Heavenly Father, I appreciate You,
Heavenly Father, I appreciate You,
I love You, adore You,
I bow down before You,
Heavenly Father, I appreciate You.

Son of God, what a wonder You are,
Son of God, what a wonder You are.
You cleansed my soul from sin,
You set the Holy Ghost within,
Son of God, what a wonder You are.

Holy Ghost, what a comfort You are,
Holy Ghost, what a comfort You are.
You lead us, You guide us,
You live right inside us,
Holy Ghost, what a comfort You are.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heavenly_love.php

Heavenly love (heavenly love) was all that could help me (was all that could 
help me)
I was astray (I was a stray) so sad and alone (so sad and alone)
I looked above (I looked above), my burdens all left me (my burdens all left me)
Now I can say (now I can say), heaven's my home (heaven's my home)

Chorus:
Heavenly love (heavenly love), the love of my Lord (the love of my Savior)
Lifting above (lifting above), for He is my sword and shield
Giving me light (giving me light), in darkness of night (in darkness of night)
Heavenly love (heavenly love), heavenly love (heavenly love)

When I shall stand (when I shall stand) at Jordan's dark river (at Jordan's dark 
river)
Shadows of night (shadows of night) are gathering above (are gathering above)
There is a pad (there is a pad), I know we'll deliver (I know we'll deliver)
Heavenly love (heavenly love), heavenly love (heavenly love)

Repeat Chorus

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heavenly_sunlight.php

Walking in sunlight all of my journey;
Over the mountains, through the deep vale;
Jesus has said, 的値l never forsake thee,"
Promise divine that never can fail.

Refrain

Heavenly sunlight, heavenly sunlight,
Flooding my soul with glory divine:
Hallelujah, I am rejoicing,
Singing His praises, Jesus is mine.

Shadows around me, shadows above me,
Never conceal my Savior and Guide;
He is the Light, in Him is no darkness;
Ever I知 walking close to His side.

Refrain

In the bright sunlight, ever rejoicing,
Pressing my way to mansions above;
Singing His praises gladly I知 walking,
Walking in sunlight, sunlight of love.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heavenly_welcome.php

Feet that have carried the gospel glad,
Tidings of peace as the Savior said;
Hands that have strengthened the weak and sad,
Will be waiting there. 

Refrain:
Those beautiful portals will open wide,
Open wide, open wide;
Those beautiful portals will open wide
To welcome thee. 

Feet that have traveled the narrow way,
Faltering not in the battle fray,
Treading the thorns in the heat of day,
Will be waiting there. 

Hands that were folded before thy view,
Pressed by thine own in a promise true,
Sprinkled with tears as the morning dew,
Will be waiting there. 

Waiting and beckoning on and on,
Resting from toil in that palace home,
Eager to know will the children come
To these mansions fair.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heavens_and_earth.php

Give thanks to the Lord for He is good
God of all gods and Lord of all lords
He does great wonders and made the creation
His lovingkindness is everlasting
His lovingkindness is everlasting

Heavens and earth (xx),
Oceans and stars (xx)
Sun, moon, the day and night,
He’s over all! (xx xx xx xx)

We thank You Lord for You are good
God of all gods and Lord of all lords
You do great wonders and made the creation
Your lovingkindness is everlasting
Your lovingkindness is everlasting

Heavens and earth (xx),
Oceans and stars (xx)
Sun, moon, the day and night,
You're over all ! (xx xx xx xx)

(repeat second verse) 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heavens_gonna_shine1.php



I don't know exactly how sweet heaven will be (will be)
I don't know what beauty or what glory I'll see (I'll see)
I don't know what I'll behold that morning divine (I only)
I know for sure that heaven's really gonna shine

Chorus:
It's gonna shine (heaven's gonna shine)
It's gonna shine (heaven's gonna shine)
Oh yes I know (yes I truly know)
It's gonna shine (really gonna shine)
There's glory in (there is glory in)
This soul of mine (in this soul of mine)
Because I know for sure that heaven's really gonna shine

I don't know how wide will be that city so fair (so fair)
I don't even know how many saints will be there (be there)
I don't know how high will be that mansion of mine (I only)
I know for sure that heaven's really gonna shine

Repeat Chorus (x2) 

Well it's gonna shine (heaven's gonna shine)
It's gonna shine (heaven's gonna shine)
Oh yes know (yes I truly know)
It's gonna shine (really gonna shine)

Well there's glory in (there is glory in)
This soul of mine (in this soul of mine)
Because I know for sure that heaven's really (gonna) gonna shine 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heavens_irony.php

On a hill outside Jerusalem
Soldiers led Him there to die for them
As they nailed the hands that created men
He prayed that they would be forgiven
A lowly carpenter from Galilee
Loved the wealth that's found in poverty
Heaven's power clothed in humility
Let the cross become His destiny

Chorus:
Through His stripes, I am healed
Through my hate, His love revealed
Through my sin, shines His light
Through His death He gives me life
Heaven's irony
The Father's love is full and free
Heaven's irony
Jesus loves me

As the blood flowed from His wounded side
Tears of love flowed as my Jesus cried
And the people mocked Him as He died
The innocent was crucified
In a borrowed tomb they buried Him
With a paupers shroud they covered Him
In a grave of hardly any worth
Lay the Maker of the universe

Repeat Chorus (with echo in first half)

Bridge
And oh what a wonderful love I have known
Like a river of life to my soul (river of life to my soul)
And oh what love (oh what love) the Savior has shown
Making my heart His home

After three days as He prophesied
The stone was rolled away, no one inside
Jesus resurrected, glorified
He's the way, the truth, the life.

Repeat Chorus (with echo in first half)

(He loves me)
Heaven's irony (Heaven's irony)
The Father's love is full and free
Heaven's irony
Jesus loves me
Jesus loves me
Jesus loves me

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heavens_jubilee.php

Some glad morning we shall see, Jesus in the air
Coming after you and me, joy is ours to share 
What rejoicing there will be, when the saints shall rise
Headed for that jubilee, yonder in the skies 

Chorus
Oh what singing, oh what shouting
On that happy morning when we all shall rise
Oh what glory, Hallelujah
When we meet our blessed Savior in the skies 
Seems that now I almost see, all the sainted dead
Rising for that jubilee, that is just ahead
In the twinkling of an eye, changed with them to be
All the living saints to fly, to that jubilee. 


Chorus
Oh what singing, oh what shouting
On that happy morning when we all shall rise
Oh what glory, Hallelujah
When we meet our blessed Savior in the skies 
When with all that heavenly host, we begin to sing
Singing in the Holy Ghost, how the heavens will ring
Millions there will join the song, with them we shall be
Praising Christ through ages long, heaven's jubilee. 


Chorus
Oh what singing, oh what shouting
On that happy morning when we all shall rise
Oh what glory, Hallelujah
When we meet our blessed Savior in the skies

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heavn_heavn.php

I've got a robe,
You've got a robe,
All God's Children got a robe;
When I get to Heaven,
Goint to put on my robe,
Goin' to shout all over God's Heav'n. 

Refrain:
Heav'n, Heav'n,
Ev'rybody talkin' 'bout
Heav'n ain't agoin' there,
Heav'n, Heav'n,
Goin' to shout all over God's Heav'n. 

2. I've got a crown,
You've got a crown,
All God's Children got a crown;
When I get to Heaven,
Goint to put on my crown,
Goin' to shout all over God's Heav'n.
Refrain: 

3. I've got a song,
You've got a song,
All God's Children got a song;
When I get to Heaven,
Goint to put on my song,
Goin' to shout all over God's Heav'n.
Refrain: 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heed_his_call.php

Oh will you come to Jesus
His invitation hear
Don't let your life be wasted
For death is drawing near 

Chorus:
Your life is but a vapor
That vanisheth away
Oh will you not hear Jesus
And heed His call today 

The greatest of decisions
Is only your own choice
The angels now in heaven
Are waiting to rejoice 

Repeat Chorus 

Don't wait until tomorrow
And Satan's calling heed
Your soul is now in danger
The Savior's blood you need 

Repeat Chorus 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heir_of_the_kingdom.php

Heir of the kingdom, O why dost thou slumber?
Why art thou sleeping so near thy blest home?
Wake thee, arouse thee, and gird on thine armor,
Speed, for the moments are hurrying on.

Heir of the kingdom, say, why dost thou linger?
How canst thou tarry in sight of the prize?
Up, and adorn thee, the Savior is coming;
Haste to receive Him descending the skies.

Earth’s mighty nations, in strife and commotion,
Tremble with terror, and sink in dismay;
Listen, ’tis naught but the chariot’s loud rumbling;
Heir of the kingdom, no longer delay.

Stay not, O stay not, for earth’s vain allurements!
See how its glory is passing away;
Break the strong fetters the foe hath bound o’er thee;
Heir of the kingdom, turn, turn thee away.

Keep the eye single, the head upward lifted;
Watch for the glory of earth’s coming King;
Lo! o’er the mountain tops light is now breaking;
Heirs of the kingdom, rejoice ye and sing.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/held_in_his_mighty_arms.php

Safe is my refuge, sweet is my rest,
Ill cannot harm me, nor foes e’er molest;
Jesus my spirit so tenderly calms,
Holding me close in His mighty arms.

Refrain

Oh! what wonderful, wonderful rest!
Trusting completely in Jesus I’m blest;
Sweetly He comforts and shields from alarms,
Holding me safe in His mighty arms.

Pressing my tear stained cheek to His own,
Hushing my grief with His sweet gentle tone;
Touching my heart with His healing balms,
Holding me still in His mighty arms.

Refrain

Tempests may rage, sin’s surges may beat,
Ne’er can they reach my sheltered retreat;
Free from all danger, from dread alarms,
Resting so safe in His mighty arms.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he'll_never_forget_to_keep_me.php

My Father has many dear children;
Will He ever forget to keep me?
He gave His own Son to redeem them,
And He cannot forget to keep me.
He値l never forget to keep me (keep me),
He値l never forget to keep me (keep me),
He gave His own Son to redeem me,
And He値l never forget to keep me.

Our Father remembers the sparrows,
Their value and fall doth He see;
But dearer to Him are His children,
And He値l never forget to keep me.
He値l never forget to keep me (keep me),
He値l never forget to keep me (keep me),
But dearer to Him are His children,
And He値l never forget to keep me.

The words of the Lord are so priceless,
How patient and watchful is He;
Though mother forget her own offspring,
Yet He値l never forget to keep me.
He値l never forget to keep me (keep me),
He値l never forget to keep me (keep me),
Though mother forget her own offspring,
Yet He値l never forget to keep me.

I now will abide in His shadow,
Never restless nor fearful will be;
In the secret of His presence He値l hide me,
And He値l never forget to keep me.
He値l never forget to keep me (keep me),
He値l never forget to keep me (keep me),
In the secret of His presence He値l hide me,
And He値l never forget to keep me.

O brother, why don稚 you accept Him?
He offers salvation so free;
Repent and believe and obey Him,
And He値l never forget to keep thee.
He値l never forget to keep thee (keep thee),
He値l never forget to keep thee (keep thee),
Repent and believe and obey Him,
And He値l never forget to keep thee.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he'll_walk_with_me_all_the_way.php

I know that my Savior will never forsake,
I know that my faith in Him never will shake;
My journey a pathway of gladness He’ll make,
He’ll walk with me all the way.

Refrain

He’ll walk with me all the way,
He’ll walk with me all the way.
He’ll help me o’er sin the vict’ry to win,
And walk with me all the way.

He’ll lead me in paths that are pleasant and green,
And show me new glories, so long since unseen;
His hand will I hold all secure and serene,
He’ll walk with me all the way.

Refrain

My eyes will new beauty and glory perceive,
As daily His blessing life’ tangles unweave;
I’ll hold to His hand and no more let Him leave;
He’ll walk with me all the way.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/help_lord_for_men_of_virtue_fail.php

Help, Lord, for men of virtue fail,
Religion loses ground,
The sons of violence prevail,
And treacheries abound.

Their oaths and promises they break,
Yet act the flatterer’s part;
With fair, deceitful lips they speak,
And with a double heart.

If we reprove some hateful lie,
How is their fury stirred!
“Are not our lips our own?" they cry;
“And who shall be our Lord?"

Scoffers appear on every side,
Where a vile race of men
Is raised to seats of power and pride,
And bears the sword in vain.

Lord, when iniquities abound,
And blasphemy grows bold,;
When faith is hardly to be found,
And love is waxing cold;

Is not Thy chariot hastening on?
Hast Thou not giv’n this sign?
May we not trust and live upon
A promise so divine?

“Yes," saith the Lord, “now will I rise,
And make oppressors flee;
I shall appear to their surprise,
And set My servants free."

Thy Word, like silver sev’n times tried,
Through ages shall endure;
The men that in Thy truth confide
Shall find the promise sure.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/help_me_find_my_way.php

Help me find my way, Lord,

Help me find my way;
Through the mist and shadows,
To the dawning day;
Darkness ’round me gathers,
Not a glint or ray;
Help me, blessed Jesus,
Help me find my way. 

Help me find my way, Lord,
Help me find my way;
May I through each valley
In Thy footsteps stay;
If ’twere but my choosing,
I’d soon go astray;
Lest I faint or stumble,
Help me find my way. 

Help me find my way,
Lord, Help me find my way;
Briar-torn and bruised,
Filled with sore dismay,
Till my head is drooping,
And my heart gives way;
Help me, blessed Jesus,
Help me find my way. 

Now I rest in Jesus,
Know His peace alway;
Light He gave for darkness,
Turned my night to day;
Joy He gave for sadness,
Till I now can say,
“Thou has helped me, Savior,
Helped me find Thy way."


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/help_me_o_lord.php

Help me, O Lord, the God of my salvation;
I have no hope, no refuge but in Thee;
Help me to make this perfect consecration,
In life or death Thine evermore to be.

Help me, O Lord, to keep my pledge unbroken;
Guard Thou my ways, my thoughts, my tongue, my heart;
Help me to trust the word which Thou hast spoken,
That from Thy paths my feet may ne’er depart.

Help me, O Lord, when sore temptations press me;
O lift the clouds that hide Thee from my sight;
Help me, O Lord, when anxious cares distress me,
To look beyond, where all is calm and bright.

Help me, O Lord, my strength is only weakness;
Thine, Thine the power by which alone I live;
Help me each day, to bear the cross with meekness,
Till Thou at last the promised crown shalt give.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/help_somebody_today.php

Look all around you, find someone in need,
Help somebody today!
Though it be little—a neighborly deed—
Help somebody today! 

Refrain:
Help somebody today,
Somebody along life’s way;
Let sorrow be ended, the friendless befriended,
Oh, help somebody today! 

Many are waiting a kind, loving word,
Help somebody today!
Thou hast a message, oh, let it be heard,
Help somebody today! 

Many have burdens too heavy to bear,
Help somebody today!
Grief is the portion of some everywhere,
Help somebody today! 

Some are discouraged and weary in heart,
Help somebody today!
Someone the journey to heaven should start,
Help somebody today! 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/help_us_to_help_each_other.php

Help us to help each other, Lord,
each other's cross to bear;
let each his friendly aid afford,
and feel his brother's care.

Up into thee, our living head,
let us in all things grow,
and by thy sacrifice be led
the fruits of love to show.

Drawn by the magnet of thy love
let all our hearts agree;
and ever towards each other move,
and ever move towards thee.

This is the bond of perfectness,
thy spotless charity.
O let us still, we pray, possess
the mind that was in thee.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/help_us_to_labor_on.php

Help us to labor on,
Savior, for Thee;
Faithful in word and deed,
O may we be.

Refrain

Till all our work is done,
Our crown of glory won,
Help us, Lord, to labor on,
Trusting in Thee.

Help us to labor on,
Cheered from above;
Sowing the word of life,
Telling Thy love.

Refrain

Help us to labor on,
Lord, not in vain;
O may we gather in,
Bright, golden grain.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/help_us_o_jesus_thou_mighty_defender.php

Help us, O Jesus, Thou mighty Defender,
Help when the forces of evil appear;
Help us to battle and never surrender,
Help us to conquer, and drive away fear;
Satan is cunning, the prince of deceivers,
Bringing disaster to many believers.

Help us, O Jesus, in hours of temptation,
When both our faith and our courage are weak;
Teach us to look to the sign of salvation,
And near Thy cross a new armor to seek;
Then we shall conquer, if Thou wilt befriend us,
Thou wilt prevail and our faith will defend us.

Help us, O Jesus, when death shall spread terror,
And our poor eyes are too feeble to see;
Cleanse us and purge us from sin and from error;
That we may blindly in faith cling to Thee;
Help us, O Jesus, we conquer in dying,
Unto the last on Thy mercy relying.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/help_us_o_lord.php

Help us, O Lord! Behold, we enter
Upon another year today;
In Thee our hopes and thoughts now center,
Renew our courage for the way.
New life, new strength, new happiness,
We ask of Thee—oh, hear and bless!

May every plan and undertaking
This year be all begun with Thee;
When I am sleeping or am waking,
Still let me know Thou art with me.
Abroad do Thou my footsteps guide,
At home be ever at my side.

Be this a time of grace and pardon.
Thy rod I take with willing mind,
But suffer naught my heart to harden;
Oh, let me then Thy mercy find!
In Thee alone, my God, I live;
Thou only canst my sins forgive.

And may this year to me be holy;
Thy grace so fill my every thought
That all my life be pure and lowly
And truthful, as a Christian’s ought.
So make me while yet dwelling here
Pious and blest from year to year.

Jesus, be with me and direct me;
Jesus, my plans and hopes inspire;
Jesus, from tempting thoughts protect me;
Jesus, be all my heart’s desire;
Jesus, be in my thoughts all day
Nor suffer me to fall away.

And grant, Lord, when the year is over,
That it for me in peace may close;
In all things care for me and cover
My head in time of fear and woes.
So may I when my years are gone
Appear with joy before Thy throne.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/help_lord_for_those_who_love_thee_fail.php

Help, Lord, for those who love Thee fail,
Thy faithful ones fall from the ranks,
And leave the liars to their tale,
False gratitude and treacherous thanks.

Lord, may those flattering lips be lashed,
The boasting mouths stripped of their pride,
Those tongues that murmur unabashed,
Who is this God? We shall abide!

“Because the poor have been oppressed,
And in their patience sigh alone,
I will protect them in My breast,"
The Lord has said, “These are Mine own."

And what He saith is purified
Like silver, sevenfold assayed.
Though by this evil age defied,
His Word of truth shall be obeyed.

His promises shall stand secure,
His saints are safe, though ill betide,
He will protect His humble poor,
Though rogues are honored far and wide.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/her_virgin_eyes.php

Her Virgin eyes saw God incarnate born,
when she to Bethlehem came that happy morn:
how high her raptures then began to swell,
none but her own omniscient Son can tell.

As Eve, when she her fontal sin reviewed,
wept for herself and all she should include,
blest Mary, with man's Saviour in embrace,
joyed for herself and for all human race.

All saints are by her Son's dear influence blest;
she kept the very fountain at her breast:
the Son adored and nursed by the sweet Maid
a thousandfold of love for love repaid.

Heaven with transcendent joys her entrance graced,
near to his throne her Son his Mother placed;
and here below, now she's of heaven possest,
all generations are to call

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/herald_in_the_wilderness.php

Herald, in the wilderness,
Breaking up the road,
Sinking mountains, raising plains,
For the path of God;

Prophet, to the multitudes
Calling to repent,
In the way of righteousness
Unto Israel sent;

Messenger, God’s chosen one
Foremost to proclaim,
Proffered titles passing by,
Pointing to the Lamb.

Captive, for the word of truth
Boldly witnessing;
Then in Herod’s dungeon cave,
Faint and languishing;

Martyr, sacrificed to sin
At that feast of shame;
As his life foreshowed the Lord,
In his death the same—

Holy Jesus, when He heard,
Went apart to pray:
Thus may we our lesson take
From his saint today.
her blest.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heralds_of_christ.php

Heralds of Christ, who bear the King’s commands,
Immortal tidings in your mortal hands,
Pass on and carry swift the news you bring;
Make straight, make straight the highway of the King.

Through desert ways, dark fen and deep morass,
Through jungles, sluggish seas, and mountain pass,
Build now the road, and falter not, nor stay;
Prepare across the earth the King’s highway.

Where once the twisting trail in darkness wound,
Let marching feet and joyous song resound,
Where burn the funeral pyres, and censers swing,
Make straight, make straight the highway of the King.

Lord, give us faith and strength the road to build,
To see the promise of the day fulfilled,
When war shall be no more, and strife shall cease
Upon the highway of the Prince of Peace.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/heralds_of_truth.php

White is the harvest, calls the Master for you,
Reapers are needed that are faithful and true;
Thrust in the sickle, all the sheaves gather in;
Go with gospel tidings, go the lost world to win. 

Refrain:
Heralds of truth from the dawn till close of day,
Tell of His love to the millions, don’t delay;
See, they are perishing, in sin they repine,
Go, ye gospel heralds, with the message divine. 

Search in the highways, bid the wand’rer to come,
Rescue the dying, all the lost gather home;
Stay not in idleness, the shadows will fall,
Fast the day is waning, tell the story to all. 

Over the billows comes a heart-rending cry—
Wails from the millions who in sin hopeless die,
Pleading for mercy who will cross o’er the waves,
With the blessed tidings, “Jesus saves, Jesus saves"? 

Swift toward eternity they haste, nor they wait,
Fast they are perishing, how sad is their state!
Work ere the day decline and soon come the night,
Till the world is flaming with the pure, gospel light. 

Haste then, ye messengers, nor tarry for dross,
Bid every guilty one to bow at His cross,
Washing away their crimson stains in His blood,
Till the world of sinners is redeemed unto God.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/here_am_i.php

Work for Jesus, little ones,
He has work for you;
At your home, at school, at play,
There is work to do. 

Refrain:
Here am I, Lord Jesus,
Here am I—send me!
Let me do Thy bidding,
Let me work for Thee. 

Someone needs a helping hand—
Help with all your might;
Little hands may helpers be,
Making burdens light. 

Someone needs a little time—
You have time to spare;
Be a helper, little one,
Helping everywhere. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/here_am_i_send_me.php

Hast Thou, O Lord, a work to do?
Here am I, send me!
The field is white, the lab’rers few,
Here am I, send me!

Refrain

Over mountain, plain or sea,
Here am I, send me!
I’ll go to the ends of the earth for Thee,
Here am I, send me!

O touch my lips with fire divine,
Here am I, send me!
The dross consume, the gold refine,
Here am I, send me!

Refrain

A lowly vessel at Thy feet,
Here am I, send me!
O cleanse and for Thy use make meet,
Here am I, send me!

Refrain

My heart now longs and yearns to go,
Here am I, send me!
To reap Thy harvest here below,
Here am I, send me!

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/here_at_bethesda's_pool.php

Here at Bethesda’s pool, the poor,
The withered, halt, and blind;
With waiting hearts expect a cure,
And free admittance find. 

Here streams of wondrous virtue flow
To heal a sin-sick soul;
To wash the filthy white as snow,
And make the wounded whole.

The dumb break forth in songs of praise,
The blind their fight receive;
The cripple runs in wisdom’s ways,
The dead revive, and live!

Restrained to no one case, or time,
These waters always move;
Sinners, in every age and clime,
Their vital influence prove.

Yet numbers daily near them lie,
Who meet with no relief;
With life in view they pine and die
In hopeless unbelief.

’Tis strange they should refuse to bathe,
And yet frequent the pool;
But none can even wish for faith,
While love of sin bears rule.

Satan their consciences has sealed,
And stupefied their thought;
For were they willing to be healed,
The cure would soon be wrought.

Do Thou, dear Savior, interpose,
Their stubborn wills constrain;
Or else to them the water flows,
And grace is preached in vain.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/here_at_they_table_lord.php

Here at Thy table, Lord, this sacred hour,
O let us feel Thee near, in loving power,
Calling our thoughts away from self and sin
As to Thy banquet hall we enter in.

Sit at the feast, dear Lord, break Thou the bread;
Fill Thou the cup that brings life to the dead;
That we may find in Thee pardon and peace,
And from all bondage win a full release.

So shall our life of faith be full, be sweet;
And we shall find our strength for each day meet;
Fed by Thy living bread, all hunger past,
We shall be satisfied, and saved at last.

Come then, O holy Christ, feed us, we pray;
Touch with Thy piercèd hand each common day;
Making this earthly life full of Thy grace,
Till in the home of heaven we find our place.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/here_from_the_world_we_turn.php

Here from the world we turn, Jesus to seek;
Here may His loving voice tenderly speak!
Jesus, our dearest Friend, while at Thy feet we bend,
O let Thy smile descend! ’Tis Thee we seek.

Come, holy Comforter, Presence divine,
Now in our longing hearts graciously shine;
O for Thy mighty power! O for a blessèd shower,
Filling this hallowed hour with joy divine!

Savior, Thy work revive; here may we see
Those who are dead in sin quickened by Thee;
Come to our hearts tonight, make every burden light;
Cheer Thou our waiting sight; we long for Thee.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/here_i_am1.php

Here I am, an ordinary face
In this world, a constant changing place
I understand my life is just a simple page
In the book of life, I pray
Holding on to what I’ve done before
I turn to you, and you open up my door
Guide me through an endless journey; I’ll be true
And live my life for you

Chorus 1: 
Here I am; I understand
The simple life that you’ve created
Majesty, I beg you please
Bring the peace to me; I’ve waited
Here I am; you know the plan
Mold my life, and help me shape it
Lord, you see; I’m on my knees
My heart is yours forever: take it

In your hands, I know that I am safe
Amazing love, you save me by grace
Without your name, I know my life is not the same
I need your sweet embrace

Repeat Chorus

Chorus 2:
Here I am (here I am)
Here I am (here I am)
Here I am (here I am; I understand; here I am)
Here I am (here I am; you know the plan; here I am)

Repeat Chorus 2

Here I am

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/here_i_am2.php

Abraham (Here I am)
Take thy son, thine only son, and go from here
Abraham (Here I am)
You must show me that your love for me is real
Isaac (Here I am)
Oh my son, my only son, let's go from here
And Isaac (Here I am)
Take the wood, I have the fire and the knife

Father (Here I am)
Oh it's good for us to serve our Lord above
Oh and Father (Here I am)
I've the wood, you have the fire, but where's the sacrifice?

Chorus 1:
God gave the ram (God gave the ram), God gave the ram (God gave the ram)
As he gave his only son, an angel stayed his hand
God gave the ram (God gave the ram), God gave the ram (God gave the ram)
Through His mercy and His love, God gave the ram

Here I am (Here I am)

Mary (Here I am)
Take my Son, my only Son and go from here
And Mary (Here I am)
He will show them that my love for them is real

Jesus (Here I am)
There's no other price that could their debt repay
Oh, and Jesus (Here I am)
Would you give you only life?

Father (Here I am)
I have come to speak, to live your love for man
Oh and Father (Here I am)
I'll take the wood upon my back, and I'll be the sacrifice

Chorus 2:
God gave the Lamb (God gave the Lamb), God gave the Lamb (God gave the Lamb)
With no one to stay His hand, He gave His only Son
God gave the Lamb (God gave the Lamb), God gave the Lamb (God gave the Lamb)
Through His mercy and His love, God gave the Lamb

Through His mercy and His love, God gave the Lamb

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/here_in_thy_name.php

1. Here in Thy name, eternal God,
We dedicate this house to Thee.
Oh, choose it for Thy fixed abode
And keep it from all error free! 

2. Here, when Thy people seek Thy face
And dying sinners pray to live,
Hear Thou in heaven, Thy dwelling-place;
And when Thou hearest, Lord, forgive. 

3. Here, when Thy messengers proclaim
The blessed Gospel of Thy Son,
Still by the power of His great name
Be mighty signs and wonders done. 

4. When children's voices raise the song,
"Hosanna to the heavenly King!"
Let heaven with earth the strain prolong.
Hosanna! let the angels sing. 

5. Thy glory never hence depart.
Yet choose not, Lord, this house alone;
Thy kingdom come to every heart,
In every bosom fix Thy throne.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/here_is_love.php

Here is love, vast as the ocean,
Lovingkindness as the flood,
When the Prince of Life, our Ransom,
Shed for us His precious blood.
Who His love will not remember?
Who can cease to sing His praise?
He can never be forgotten,
Throughout Heav’n’s eternal days.

On the mount of crucifixion,
Fountains opened deep and wide;
Through the floodgates of God’s mercy
Flowed a vast and gracious tide.
Grace and love, like mighty rivers,
Poured incessant from above,
And Heav’n’s peace and perfect justice
Kissed a guilty world in love.

Let me all Thy love accepting,
Love Thee, ever all my days;
Let me seek Thy kingdom only
And my life be to Thy praise;
Thou alone shalt be my glory,
Nothing in the world I see.
Thou hast cleansed and sanctified me,
Thou Thyself hast set me free.

In Thy truth Thou dost direct me
By Thy Spirit through Thy Word;
And Thy grace my need is meeting,
As I trust in Thee, my Lord.
Of Thy fullness Thou art pouring
Thy great love and power on me,
Without measure, full and boundless,
Drawing out my heart to Thee.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/here_we_are1.php

Chorus:
Here we are in your presence
Lifting holy hands to you
Here we are praising Jesus
For the things he's brought us through

Well, I don't have the words to tell you how I feel
I just don't know what I can say
But I'm not worthy to speak your holy name
Yet you tell me you love me just the same

Repeat Chorus

Well, I never thought that it could be this way
I never though I'd be the one
But you found me when I was dying in my sin
You looked at me with love and took me in

Repeat Chorus (x2)

For the things he's brought us through

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/here_we_come_acarolling1.php

Merry Christmas (Merry Christmas)
Merry Christmas (Merry Christmas)
Merry Christmas (Merry Christmas)
Merry Christmas (Merry Christmas) 

Here we come a-caroling among the leaves so green
Here we come a-wondering so fair to be seen
Love and joy come to you, and to you your carol too
And God bless you and send you a happy new year
And God send you a happy new year 

Said the night wind to the little lamb
"Do you see what I see? (Do you see what I see?)"
Way up in the sky little lamb
"Do you see what I see? (Do you see what I see?)" 

A star, a star
Dancing in the night
With a tail as big as a kite
With a tail as big as a kite 

Silent night, holy night
All is calm, all is bright
Round yon Virgin Mother and Child
Holy Infant so tender and mild
Sleep in heavenly peace
Sleep in heavenly peace 

Merry Christmas, Merry Christmas
Merry Christmas, Merry Christmas 

Angels we have heard on high
Sweetly singing o'er the plains 
And the mountains in reply 
Echoing their joyous strains 

Gloria in excelsis Deo
Gloria in excelsis Deo 

O come, let us adore Him
O come, let us adore Him
O come, let us adore Him
Christ the Lord 

Here we come a-caroling among the leaves so green
Here we come a-wondering so fair to be seen 

Joy to the world, The Lord is come
Let earth receive her King 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/here_lord_we_offer_thee.php

Here, Lord, we offer Thee all that is fairest,
Bloom from the garden, and flowers from the field;
Gifts for the stricken ones, knowing Thou carest
More for the love than the wealth that we yield.

Send, Lord, by these to the sick and the dying,
Speak to their hearts with a message of peace;
Comfort the sad, who in weakness are lying,
Grant the departing a gentle release.

Raise, Lord, to health those again who have sickened,
Fair be their lives as the roses in bloom;
Give of Thy grace to the souls Thou hast quickened,
Gladness for sorrow, and brightness for gloom.

We, Lord, like flowers, must bloom and must wither;
We, like these blooms, must fade and must die;
Gather us, Lord, to Thy bosom forever,
Grant us a place in Thy house in the sky.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/here_o_my_lord_i_see_thee.php

Here, O my Lord, I see Thee face to face;
Here would I touch and handle things unseen;
Here grasp with firmer hand eternal grace,
And all my weariness upon Thee lean.

This is the hour of banquet and of song;
This is the heavenly table spread for me;
Here let me feast, and feasting, still prolong
The hallowed hour of fellowship with Thee.

Here would I feed upon the bread of God,
Here drink with Thee the royal wine of Heaven;
Here would I lay aside each earthly load,
Here taste afresh the calm of sin forgiven.

I have no help but Thine; nor do I need
Another arm save Thine to lean upon;
It is enough, my Lord, enough indeed;
My strength is in Thy might, Thy might alone.

I have no wisdom save in Him Who is
My Wisdom and my Teacher both in One;
No wisdom can I lack while Thou art wise;
No teaching do I crave save Thine alone.

Mine is the sin, but Thine the righteousness:
Mine is the guilt, but Thine the cleansing blood;
Here is my robe, my refuge, and my peace;
Thy Blood, Thy righteousness, O Lord my God!

Too soon we rise; the symbols disappear;
The feast, though not the love, is past and gone.
The bread and wine remove; but Thou art here,
Nearer than ever, still my Shield and Sun.

Feast after feast thus comes and passes by;
Yet, passing, points to the glad feast above,
Giving sweet foretaste of the festal joy,
The Lamb’s great bridal feast of bliss and love.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he's_a_friend_of_mine.php

Why should I charge my soul with care?
The wealth of every mine
Belongs to Christ, God’s Son and Heir,
And He’s a Friend of mine.

Refrain

Yes, He’s a Friend of mine,
And He with me doth all things share;
Since all is Christ’s, and Christ is mine,
Why should I have a care?
For Jesus is a Friend of mine.

The silver moon, the golden sun,
The countless stars that shine,
Are His alone, yes, every one,
And He’s a Friend of mine.

Refrain

He daily spreads a glorious feast,
And at His table dine
The whole creation, man and beast,
And He’s a Friend of mine.

Refrain

And when he comes in bright array,
And leads the conqu’ring line,
It will be glory then to say,
That He’s a Friend of mine.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he's_a_wonderful_savior_to_me.php

I was lost in sin, but Jesus rescued me,
He’s a wonderful Savior to me;
I was bound by fear, but Jesus set me free,
He’s a wonderful Savior to me. 

Refrain:
For He’s a wonderful Savior to me,
He’s a wonderful Savior to me;
I was lost in sin, but Jesus took me in:
He’s a wonderful Savior to me. 

He’s a Friend so true, so patient and so kind,
He’s a wonderful Savior to me;
Everything I need in Him I always find,
He’s a wonderful Savior to me. 

He is always near to comfort and to cheer,
He’s a wonderful Savior to me;
He forgives my sins, He dries my every tear,
He’s a wonderful Savior to me. 

Dearer grows the love of Jesus day by day,
He’s a wonderful Savior to me.
Sweeter is His grace while pressing on my way,
He’s a wonderful Savior to me.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he's_able_and_willing.php

A sinner more wretched than I,
There could not be;
’Till Jesus the mighty, came nigh,
To set me free,
I opened my heart to His call,
His own to be,
And when I surrendered all,
My Lord saved me.

Refrain

He’s able and willing to save,
Able, willing,
He’s able and willing to save,
For He saved me.

His power no limit can know,
His grace is mine;
His love He is willing to show,
’Tis love divine;
His mercy is offered today,
So full, so free,
He’ll never turn you away,
For He saved me.

Refrain

He’s able and willing to go
O’er mountains steep,
Or down in the valley so low,
Or stormy deep:
If willing His bidding to do,
His own you’ll be,
I know He can keep you true,
For He keeps me.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hes_alive.php

The gates and doors were barred
The windows fastened down
Spent the night in sleeplessness
And rose at ev'ry sound
Half in hopeless sorrow
Half in fear of the day
To find the soldiers breaking thru 
To drag us all away 

Just before the sunrise
I heard something at the wall
The gates began to rattle
A voice began to call
I hurried to the window
To look down to the street
Expecting swords and torches
And the sound of soldiers' feet. 

No one there but Mary
And so I went down to let her in
John stood there beside me
As she told us where she'd been
She said they've moved Him in the night
And none of us knows where
The stone's been rolled away
And His body isn't there 

We both ran toward the garden
And then John ran ahead
We found the stone and the empty tomb
Just the way that Mary'd said
But the winding sheet they wrapped Him in was just an empty shell
And how and why they'd taken Him
Was more than I could tell 

Something strange had happened there
Just what I didn't know
John believed in a miracle 
I just turned to go
Circumstance and speculation couldn't lift me very high
'Cause I had seen Him crucified
Then I watched Him die 

Back inside the house again
The guilt and anguish came
Everything I'd promised Him 
Just added to my shame
When at last it came a choice
I denied I knew His name
But even if He was alive
It wouldn't be the same 

Suddenly the air was filled with a strange and sweet perfume
Light that came from ev'rywhere took shadows from the room
Jesus stood before me with His arms open wide
And I fell down upon my knees and just clung to Him and cried 

He raised me to my feet as I looked into His eyes
Love was shining out from Him like sunlight from the skies (sunlight from the 
skies)
Guilt and my confusion disappeared in sweet release (sweet release)
Every fear that I'd ever had just melted into peace 

Chorus:
He's alive! (He's alive!)
He's alive! (He's alive!)
He's alive and I'm forgiven
Heaven's gates are open wide 

Repeat Chorus (x4 with variations and fade out) 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he's_coming_back_again.php

There’s a blessèd hope that thrills my heart to know
That the Christ Who came to earth so long ago,
Bearing all our sins because He loved us so,
Promised He’d come back again some day.

Refrain

Coming, oh, yes, He’s coming,
The very same as when He went away,
Coming, my Lord is coming,
Oh praise His blessèd Name,
He’s coming back some day.

He Who on the cross for me was crucified,
He Who for my sin and shame in anguish died,
He Whose resurrection fully justified,
Promised He’d come back again some day.

Refrain

When He comes again ’twill be as King of kings,
Perfect peace and joy to all the earth He’ll bring,
Then throughout eternity, His praise we’ll sing,
When, in glory, He returns some day.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he's_coming_soon.php

In these, the closing days of time,
What joy the glorious hope affords,
That soon—O wondrous truth sublime!
He shall reign, King of kings and Lord of Lords.

Refrain

He’s coming soon, He’s coming soon;
With joy we welcome His returning;
It may be morn, it may be night or noon—
We know He’s coming soon.

The signs around—in earth and air,
Or painted on the starlit sky,
God’s faithful witnesses—declare
That the coming of the Savior draweth nigh.

Refrain

The dead in Christ who ’neath us lie,
In countless numbers, all shall rise
When through the portals of the sky
He shall come to prepare our paradise.

Refrain

And we, who living, yet remain,
Caught up, shall meet our faithful Lord;
This hope we cherish not in vain,
But we comfort one another by this word.

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/he's_everything_to_me.php

My Savior’s love is sweeter still,
Each day I try to do His will;
My heart with peace and joy He fills,
He’s everything to me.

Refrain

He’s all in all to me today,
Into my heart He’s come to stay;
He’s all in all to me today,
He’s everything to me.

Such wondrous blessings o’er me stole,
When Jesus came and made me whole,
His love like billows o’er me roll,
He’s everything to me.

Refrain

No good thing does my Lord deny,
I feel His presence ever nigh;
Earth’s pleasures fail to satisfy,
He’s everything to me.

Refrain

I’m watching for my King’s return,
To see His face my soul doth yearn,
Yet day by day I live to learn,
He’s everything to me.

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hes_gonna_let_you_know.php

Chorus:
Even though the wind may blow
Troubles toss you to end and fro
Get on your knees and give it time
There the answers you will find in Jesus
He's gonna let you know
Repeat Chorus

In my darkest hours
I have never been alone
Tho' I could not see the Son
I knew He was right there
Oh yes He was
When your heart turns sour
And your faith has all but flown
Seek the Holy Spirit
And He will be right there
I've got to have the Lord's direction
Simply for my own protection

Repeat Chorus

At my weakest moment
Is the time that He will be strong
He will not forsake you
You know He will be right there
He has made the difference
In the Lord you can't go wrong 
What you need He's gonna give you
He's gonna be right there yes He will
Put your cares upon the Lord
And live with Him in one accord

Bridge:
Oh the storm is a vicious pill to swallow
For the path becomes unclear
But through it all He is holding my tomorrow
Leaning on the Master will bring peace instead of tears
I have seen His power
Coming down from heaven's throne
As he showered the blessings
I knew He was right there, right there
Like a mighty tower
He's the rock that we call home
When he comes I'm gonna be running
I'm gonna be up there
I'm gonna be with the Lord
Oh I don't really understand it
But I know that I can't live without it 

Even though the wind may blow (you know it's gonna blow sometimes)
Troubles toss you to end and fro (help me, Lord, to make up my mind)
Get on your knees and give it time (gotta need you)
There the answers you will find in Jesus (gotta need you)
He's gonna let you know (He gonna let you know)

Even though the wind may blow (Oh, we need the Lord in our lives)
Troubles toss you to end and fro (I can't make it on my own)
Get on your knees and give it time (One day gonna be with Him, oh yeah)
There the answers you will find in Jesus
He's gonna let you, let you know 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hes_got_the_whole_world_in_his_hands.php

1. He´s got the whole world in His hands,
|: He´s got the whole world in His hands, :|
He´s got the whole world in His hands. 

2. He´s got the wind and the rain in His hands,
|: He´s got the wind and the rain in His hands, :|
He´s got the whole world in His hands. 

3. He´s got the the tiny little baby in His hands,
|: He´s got the the tiny little baby in His hands, :|
He´s got the whole world in His hands. 

4. He´s got you and me, brother, in His hands,
|: He´s got you and me, brother, in His hands, :|
He´s got the whole world in His hands. 

5. He's got ev'rybody here in His hands.
|: He's got ev'rybody here in His hands. :|
He's got the whole world in His hands. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. He´s got the whole world in His hands,
|: He´s got the whole world in His hands, :|
He´s got the whole world in His hands.
He's got the earth and sky in his hands;
He's got the night and day in his hands;
He's got the sun and moon in his hands;
He´s got the whole world in His hands. 

2. He´s got the whole world in His hands,
|: He´s got the whole world in His hands, :|
He´s got the whole world in His hands.
He's got the land and sea in his hands;
He's got the wind and rain in his hands;
He's got the spring and fall in his hands;
He´s got the whole world in His hands. 

3. He´s got the whole world in His hands,
|: He´s got the whole world in His hands, :|
He´s got the whole world in His hands.
He's got the young and old in his hands;
He's got the rich and poor in his hands;
Yes, he's got ev'ry one in his hands;
He´s got the whole world in His hands. 

He´s got the whole world in His hands,
|: He´s got the whole world in His hands, :|
He´s got the whole world in His hands. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hes_in_the_midst.php

As you travel down life's road.
He is with you every day.
With every step you take He's walked ahead of you.
And every night as you lay down
Angels are camping all around.
I'll never be alone for He is in the midst.

Into the prison they were thrown.
Paul and Silas weren't alone.
They knew their God was there
And He would see them through.
So when the walls began to shake
And all their chains just fell away.
They cried behold Our God for He is in the midst.

He's In The Midst
He's in the midst of our storm.
He's in the valley we walk through.
Where two or three are gathered in His name
...He'll be there too.
When you feel so all alone,
He is standing next to you.
He's with us now
...our Lord, He's in the midst.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hes_lord.php

I'm tired of livin' for Fridays, tired of dreadin' Mondays
So tired of what this world considers right
I just want to make a difference as I travel here below
I want somehow to let this whole world know

Chorus:
He's Lord of all (He's Lord of all) and Lord of me (and Lord of me)
And Lord of everything I'm gonna be
Someday I'm gonna see Him in a place I call home
Someday I'll humbly bow before His throne

If I can only show He loves them, I can show they need Him
If I can show how much He's done for me
There'll be no way to stop them from reaching for salvation
They'll be no way to stop loves overflow

Because...
Repeat Chorus

I will be made perfect, all my imperfections gone
The lamb who died will occupy the throne
We'll all glorify Him, free at last from Satan's wrong
We will all join in the victory's song

We'll sing...
Repeat Chorus

Someday I'm gonna meet Him in a place I call home
Someday I'll humbly bow before His throne

Because He's Lord of all
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hes_still_working_on_me.php



Chorus:
He's still working on me
To make me what I need to be
It took him just a week to make the moon and stars
The sun and the earth and Jupiter and Mars
How loving and patient He must be
'Cause He's still workin' on me 

Repeat Chorus 

There really ought to be a sign upon my heart
Don't judge him yet, there's an unfinished part
But I'll be better just according to His plan
Fashioned by the Master's loving hands 

Repeat Chorus 

In the mirror of His word
Reflections that I see
Makes me wonder why He never gave up on me
But He loves me as I am and helps me when I pray
Remember He's the potter; I'm the clay 

Repeat Chorus (x2) 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hes_the_one.php

Is there anyone can help us, one who understands our hearts,
When the thorns of life have pierced them till they bleed;
One who sympathizes with us, who in wondrous love imparts
Just the very very blessing that we need?

Refrain:
Yes, there's One, only One,
The blessed, blessed Jesus, He's the One!
When afflictions press the soul, When waves of trouble roll,
And you need a friend to help you, He's the One.

Is there anyone can help us, who can give the sinner peace,
When his heart is burdened down with pain and woe;
Who can speak the word of pardon that affords a sweet release,
And whose blood can wash and make us white as snow?

Is there anyone can help us, when the end is drawing near,
Who will go thro' death's dark waters by our side;
Who will light the way before us, and dispel all doubts and fears,
And will bear our spirits safely o'er the tide? 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hid_away_with_jesus.php

I知 hid away with Christ in God,
Yes, hid away with Jesus;
I知 now beneath the dripping blood,
I知 hid away with Jesus;
I知 walking with my blessed Lord,
I知 trusting in His precious word,
I find His service is not hard,
I知 hid away with Jesus. 

Refrain:
I知 hid away, yes, hid away,
I知 hid with Christ in God;
I知 dead to sin, alive in Christ,
I知 washed in His blood. 

The narrow way is now so plain,
I知 hid away with Jesus;
That fools shall never err therein,
I知 hid away with Jesus;
The gate that痴 strait is just before,
Which when we reach we値l sigh no more,
Our sorrows then will all be o弾r,
I知 hid away with Jesus. 

Oh, brother dear, to keep good cheer,
Be hid away with Jesus;
For then you値l find your Savior near,
Keep hid away with Jesus;
We池e basking now in heaven痴 light,
By faith and prayer our way shines bright,
We get so near that heav地痴 in sight,
When hid away with Jesus. 

Oh, sinner turn to God and live,
Be hid away with Jesus;
A crown of life to you He値l give,
When hid away with Jesus;
Repent, believe, and love Him too,
For He has done so much for you,
He値l wash and cleanse you through and through,
Be hid away with Jesus. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hidden_place.php

I cannot tell thee whence it came,
This peace within my breast;
But this I know, there fills my soul
A strange and tranquil rest.

Refrain

There’s a deep, settled peace in my soul,
There’s a deep, settled peace in my soul,
Tho’ the billows of sin near me roll,
He abides, Christ abides.

Beneath the toil and care of life,
This hidden stream flows on;
My weary soul no longer thirsts,
Nor am I sad and lone.

Refrain

I cannot tell the half of love,
Unfeigned, supreme, divine,
That caused my darkest inmost self
With beams of hope to shine.

Refrain

I cannot tell thee why He chose
To suffer and to die,
But if I suffer here with Him
I’ll reign with Him on high.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hide_gods_word_in_your_heart.php

Hide God’s Word in your heart,
Its precious truth believe;
At His command take from His hand,
The Bread of Life receive.

Refrain

Hide God’s Word in your heart,
Hide God’s Word in your heart—
His Word of love sent from above,
Hide God’s Word in your heart.

Hide God’s Word in your heart,
If you would grow in grace,
And like Him be until you see
Your Master face to face.

Refrain

Hide God’s Word in your heart,
And seek the Spirit’s pow’r
To understand each blest command
He gives from hour to hour.

Refrain

Hide God’s Word in your heart,
And, having hidden well,
Seek out the lost, the tempest tossed,
Go forth His love to tell.

Refrain

Hide God’s Word in your heart,
Each day a verse repeat;
Tho’ sin allure success is sure,
You cannot have defeat.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hide_me.php

Keep me as the apple of Thine eye,
Joyful in the glory pardon brings;
Help me, Lord, to trust Thee, though I die,
Hide me in the shadow of Thy wings. 

Refrain:
Hide me in the shadow of Thy wings,
Hide me till this stormy life is o’er;
Hide me in the shadow of Thy wings,
Hide me, Savior, hide me evermore. 

Keep me as the apple of Thine eye,
Unto Thee by faith my spirit clings;
Help me at Thy feet to passive lie,
Hide me in the shadow of Thy wings. 

Keep me as the apple of Thine eye,
From the awful blight of sinful things;
Firmly on Thy promise I rely,
Hide me in the shadow of Thy wings. 

Keep me as the apple of Thine eye,
While my faith in full assurance sings;
Victory as upward I shall fly,
Covered with the shadow of Thy wings. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hide_me_away_o_lord1.php

Hide me away, O Lord (Hide me away, O Lord)
Hide me away, O Lord (Hide me away, O)
In the day of trouble 'neath the shadow of your wings
Hide me away, O Lord (Hide me away, O Lord) 

Give me your peace, O Lord (Give me your peace, O Lord)
Give me your peace, O Lord (Give me your peace, O)
In the day of trouble 'neath the shadow of your wings
Give me your peace, O Lord (Give me your peace, O Lord) 

Safe in your dwelling place (Safe in your dwelling place)
Safe in your dwelling place (Safe in your dwelling)
In the day of trouble 'neath the shadow of your wings
Safe in your dwelling place (Safe in your dwelling place) 

Repeat Verse 1 (x2) 

Hide me away, O Lord (Hide me away, O Lord)
Hide me away, O Lord (Hide me away, O Lord) 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hide_me_rock_of_ages.php

Oh Thou blessed rock of ages (rock of ages I am)
Trusting now dear Lord in Thee (dear Lord in thee I'm trusting)
Keep me till my journey's ended (journey's ended, keep me)
Till Thy blessed face I see

Chorus:
Hide me oh blessed rock of ages (blessed rock of ages hide me)
'Til Thy blessed face I see (Thy face I see in glory)
When the storms around me rages (round me rages, blessed)
Rock of ages hide Thou me

When my journey is completed (is completed Saviour)
And there's no more work to do (no work to do oh blessed)
Saviour guide my weary spirit (weary spirit to that)
Happy land beyond the blue

Repeat Chorus (x2)

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hide_thou_me.php

In Thy cleft, O Rock of Ages, hide Thou me!
When the fitful tempest rages, hide Thou me!
Where no mortal arm can sever
From my heart Thy love forever,
Hide me, O Thou Rock of Ages, safe in Thee!

From the snare of sinful pleasure, hide Thou me!
Thou, my soul’s eternal Treasure, hide Thou me!
When the world its power is wielding,
And my heart is almost yielding,
Hide me, O Thou Rock of Ages, safe in Thee!

In the lonely night of sorrow, hide Thou me!
Till in glory dawns the morrow, hide Thou me!
When we’re nearing Jordan’s billow,
Let Thy bosom be my pillow;
Hide me, O Thou Rock of Ages, safe in Thee!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hideaway.php

Lord I'm tired and I'm upset, I've done things we both regret
Now I need a place to hide away
Like a child who skins his knee, how You gently comfort me
There's no bandage like the things You say

Chorus 1:
And I know that You are God, God
How can it be, that You're a father to the likes of me
And I know that you are Lord, Lord
So take this day, let me run to You and hide away

I can't go this extra mile 'til I sit with you awhile
Pour out all my heart this way
Though the day may run too swift, I can make it only if
For a moment I could hide away

Repeat Chorus 1

Chorus 2:
And I know that You are God, God
How can it be, that You're a father to the likes of me (father to me)
And I know that you are Lord, Lord
So take this day, let me run to You and hide away

Let me run to You and hide away


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hiding_in_his_mercy.php

God is my keeper, whom shall I fear?
Though burdens press me,
His hands caress me;
With grace to bless me,
Jesus is near. 

Refrain:
In His mercy I will hide,
In His mercy I will hide;
In His pity He redeemed me,
In His mercy I will safely hide. 

God is my portion; in life’s dark hour
He will uphold me,
Thus He hath told me;
His arms enfold me
With keeping pow’r. 

God is my comfort, courage and rest,
He’ll not forsake me,
Strong He will make me,
Till He shall take me
Home with the blest. 

God will be with me, faithful is He;
Friends are betraying,
Fond hopes decaying,
Still He is saying,
“Trust thou in Me."

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hiding_in_thee.php

O safe to the Rock that is higher than I,
My soul in its conflicts and sorrows would fly;
So sinful, so weary, Thine, Thine, would I be;
Thou blest “Rock of Ages," I’m hiding in Thee.

Refrain

Hiding in Thee, hiding in Thee,
Thou blest “Rock of Ages,"
I’m hiding in Thee.

In the calm of the noontide, in sorrow’s lone hour,
In times when temptation casts o’er me its power;
In the tempests of life, on its wide, heaving sea,
Thou blest “Rock of Ages," I’m hiding in Thee.

Refrain

How oft in the conflict, when pressed by the foe,
I have fled to my refuge and breathed out my woe;
How often, when trials like sea billows roll,
Have I hidden in Thee, O Thou Rock of my soul.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/high_in_the_heavens_eternal_god.php

High in the heav’ns, eternal God,
Thy goodness in full glory shines;
Thy truth shall break through every cloud
That veils and darkens Thy designs.

Forever firm Thy justice stands,
As mountains their foundations keep;
Wise are the wonders of Thy hands;
Thy judgments are a mighty deep.

Thy providence is kind and large
Both man and beast Thy bounty share;
The whole creation is Thy charge,
But saints are Thy peculiar care.

My God, how excellent Thy grace,
Whence all our hope and comfort spring!
The sons of Adam in distress
Fly to the shadow of Thy wing.

From the provisions of Thy house
We shall be fed with sweet repast;
There mercy like a river flows,
And brings salvation to our taste.

Life, like a fountain, rich and free,
Springs from the presence of the Lord;
And in Thy light our souls shall see
The glories promised in Thy Word.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/high_let_us_swell.php

High let us swell our tuneful notes,
And join the angelic throng,
For angels no such love have known
To wake cheerful song.

Good will to sinful men is shown,
And peace on earth is given:
For, lo, the incarnate Saviour comes
With grace and truth from heaven.

Justice and peace with sweet accord
His rising beams adorn;
Let heaven and earth in concert join
To us a Child is born!
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/high_on_a_hill_of_dazzling_light.php

High on a hill of dazzling light
The King of glory spreads His seat,
And troops of angels stretched for flight,
Stand waiting round His awful feet.

“Go," saith the Lord, “My Gabriel, go,
Salute the virgin’s fruitful womb;
Make haste, ye cherubs down below,
Sing and proclaim the Savior come."

Here a bright squadron leaves the skies,
And thick around Elisha stands;
Anon a heav’nly soldier flies,
And breaks the chains from Peter’s hands.

Thy wingèd troops, O God of hosts!
Wait on Thy wandering church below:
Here we are sailing to Thy coasts;
Let angels be our convoy, too.

Are they not all Thy servants, Lord?
At Thy command they go and come;
With cheerful haste obey Thy word,
And guard Thy children to their home.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/high_on_his_everlasting_throne.php

High on His everlasting throne,
The King of saints His work surveys;
Marks the dear souls He calls His own,
And smiles on the peculiar race.

He rests well pleased their toils to see;
Beneath His easy yoke they move;
With all their heart and strength agree
In the sweet labor of His love.

See where the servants of their Lord,
A busy multitude, appear;
For Jesus day and night employed,
His heritage they toil to clear.

Jesus their toil delighted sees,
Their industry vouchsafes to crown;
He kindly gives the wished increase,
And sends the promised blessing down.

O multiply the sower’s seed,
And fruit we every hour shall bear;
Throughout the world Thy Gospel spread,
Thine everlasting truth declare!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/high_word_of_god.php

High Word of God, Who once didst come,
Leaving Thy Father and Thy home,
To succor by Thy birth our kind,
When, towards Thy advent, time declined,

Pour light upon us from above,
And fire our hearts with Thy strong love,
That, as we hear Thy Gospel read,
All fond desires may flee in dread;

That when Thou comest from the skies,
Great Judge, to open Thine assize,
To give each hidden sin its smart,
And crown as kings the pure in heart,

We be not set at Thy left hand,
Where sentence due would bid us stand,
But with the saints Thy face may see,
Forever wholly loving Thee.

Praise to the Father and the Son,
Through all the ages as they run;
And to the holy Paraclete
Be praise with Them and worship meet.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/higher_ground.php

I’m pressing on the upward way,
New heights I’m gaining every day;
Still praying as I’m onward bound,
“Lord, plant my feet on higher ground." 

Refrain:
Lord, lift me up and let me stand,
By faith, on Heaven’s tableland,
A higher plane than I have found;
Lord, plant my feet on higher ground. 

My heart has no desire to stay
Where doubts arise and fears dismay;
Though some may dwell where those abound,
My prayer, my aim, is higher ground. 

I want to live above the world,
Though Satan’s darts at me are hurled;
For faith has caught the joyful sound,
The song of saints on higher ground. 

I want to scale the utmost height
And catch a gleam of glory bright;
But still I’ll pray till heav’n I’ve found,
“Lord, plant my feet on higher ground."

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/higher_higher.php

Higher, higher,
Higher, higher, higher,
Higher, higher, lift Jesus higher.
Higher, higher,
Higher, higher, higher,
Higher, higher, lift Jesus higher.

Cast your burdens onto Jesus,
He cares for you.
Cast your burdens onto Jesus,
He cares for you.

Lower, lower,
Lower, lower, lower,
Lower, lower, lower Satan lower.
Lower, lower,
Lower, lower, lower,
Lower, lower, lower Satan lower.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/higher_perspective.php

Yet my weakness is made perfect in your unfailing love... 
The things I do may not mean much they seem so insufficient
I don't understand how these poor gifts can bring such delight to you
With each small step I take, I take two in the wrong direction
Yet you're always by my side gently guiding me 

Chorus:
I'm not perfect Lord, I never will be
Please help me to see from a higher perspective
I am weak and afraid stumbling along the way
And my weakness is made perfect in your unfailing love 

I'm frustrated by myself, by my self-indulgence
Perfection seems so far (so far away), seems so far away
But even as I mourn (even as I mourn), as I mourn my failures
You make my failures work for good and you morn my self defeat (and you keep on 
loving me)
And you morn my self defeat 

Repeat Chorus 

I can't compare myself to others
You made me unique
I can't wait for a change in myself
You've already made me complete
I can't submit to self-pity
As the demons in hell do
I can only cast my fears, my doubts,
My inhibitions on you 

You make me perfect Lord
You put your soul in me
And you help me to see
From a higher perspective
You give me strength when I'm afraid
You show me a better way
And my weakness is made perfect in your unfailing love
And my weakness is made perfect in your unfailing love
And my weakness is made perfect in your unfailing love (repeat with stepouts)


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hills_of_the_north_rejoice.php

Hills of the North, rejoice;
River and mountain spring,
Hark to the advent voice;
Valley and lowland, sing;
Though absent long, your Lord is nigh;
He judgment brings and victory.

Isles of the southern seas,
Deep in your coral caves
Pent be each warring breeze,
Lulled be your restless waves:
He comes to reign with boundless sway,
And makes your wastes His great highway.

Lands of the East, awake,
Soon shall your sons be free;
The sleep of ages break,
And rise to liberty.
On your far hills, long cold and gray,
Has dawned the everlasting day.

Shores of the utmost West,
Ye that have waited long,
Unvisited, unblest,
Break forth to swelling song;
High raise the note, that Jesus died,
Yet lives and reigns, the Crucified.

Shout, while ye journey home;
Songs be in every mouth;
Lo, from the North we come,
From East, and West, and South.
City of God, the bond are free,
We come to live and reign in thee!


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/himself.php



Once it was the blessing,
Now it is the Lord;
Once it was the feeling,
Now it is His Word;
Once His gift I wanted,
Now, the Giver own;
Once I sought for healing,
Now Himself alone.
Refrain

All in all forever,
Jesus will I sing;
Everything in Jesus,
And Jesus everything.

Once ’twas painful trying,
Now ’tis perfect trust;
Once a half salvation,
Now the uttermost;
Once ’twas ceaseless holding,
Now He holds me fast;
Once ’twas constant drifting,
Now my anchor’s cast.

Refrain

Once ’twas busy planning,
Now ’tis trustful prayer;
Once ’twas anxious caring,
Now He has the care;
Once ’twas what I wanted,
Now what Jesus says;
Once ’twas constant asking,
Now ’tis ceaseless praise.

Refrain

Once it was my working,
His it hence shall be;
Once I tried to use Him,
Now He uses me;
Once the pow’r I wanted,
Now the Mighty One;
Once for self I labored,

Now for Him alone.

Refrain

Once I hoped in Jesus,
Now I know He’s mine;
Once my lamps were dying,
Now they brightly shine;
Once for death I waited,
Now His coming hail;
And my hopes are anchored
Safe within the veil.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_are_the_thousand_sparkling_rills.php



His are the thousand sparkling rills
That from a thousand fountains burst,
And fill with music all the hills;
And yet He saith, “I thirst."

All fiery pangs on battlefields;
On fever beds where sick men toss,
And in that human cry He yields
To anguish on the cross.

But more than pains that racked Him then,
Was the deep longing thirst divine
That thirsted for the souls of men:
Dear Lord! and one was mine.

O Love most patient, give me grace;
Make all my soul athirst for Thee;
That parched dry lip, that fading face,
That thirst, were all for me.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_banner_over_us.php

We are children of the King,
And His praises we will sing,
As we journey to our home above—
His banner over us is love!

Refrain

Marching! Marching!
With happy hearts we onward move;
No foe we fear, with our Captain near—
His banner over us is love!

He, the glorious Son of God,
Hath the way before us trod;
Over every foe we’ll conqu’ror prove—
His banner over us is love!

Refrain

Fearless in our Leader’s might,
Strong to do and dare the right;
We will journey to our home above—
His banner over us is love!

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_battle_ended_there.php

His battle ended there, death was overcome.
Jesus, alive again, wore the victor's crown.
Clearly sin had failed, goodness had prevailed,
alleluia, alleluia;
alleluia, alleluia.

Dread powers of death and sin had him in their hold.
When Jesus rose again all their plans were foiled.
Jesus lived again, triumphed over sin,
alleluia, alleluia;
alleluia, alleluia.

Dead in the grave he lay; mourned by every friend.
Those dark and fearful days then did reach their end.
God raised him to life, victor in the strife.
alleluia, alleluia;
alleluia, alleluia.

He burst the chains of sin, opened death's dark jail.
God filled him with new life, life that could not fail.
Right before their eyes, Jesus did arise,
alleluia, alleluia;
alleluia, alleluia.

Lord, by the pains you bore in your darkest hour,
free us from fear of death, and from all sin's power.
May we with you live, to you ourselves give,
alleluia, alleluia;
alleluia, alleluia.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_blood_availed_for_me.php

There’s a crimson tide from the Savior’s side,
And it purgeth all who plunge therein;
O its healing stream doth the soul redeem,
And it cleanseth from all sin.

Refrain

Hallelujah! Hallelujah!
It cleansed my heart and made me free;
Hallelujah! Hallelujah!
His blood availed for me.

There’s a boundless sea flowing full and free,
From the cross where Jesus bled and died;
O its precious flow washes white as snow,
And its mercies e’er abide.

Refrain

From the contrite heart He doth ne’er depart,
But He offers pardon o’er and o’er;
He the sins doth roll from the burdened soul,
And remembers them no more.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_blood_my_plea.php

His blood is all my plea,
Through grace divine alone,
To set the captives free,
It speaks before the throne. 

Refrain:
His blood, His blood,
O wondrous, cleansing fountain!
His blood, His blood,
It flows from Calv’ry’s mountain. 

His blood is all my plea,
Oh, wondrous, cleansing wave!
It reaches even me,
Its virtue now doth save. 

His blood is all my plea,
Naught else will satisfy—
That I might ransomed be,
And not forever die. 

His blood is all my plea;
His favor doth bestow
A greater love on me
Than earthly friends can show. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_cheering_message_from_the_grave.php

His cheering message from the grave
An angel to the women gave:
“Full soon your Master ye shall see;
He goes before to Galilee."

But while with flying steps they press
To bear the news, all eagerness,
Their Lord, the living Lord, they meet,
And prostrate fall to kiss His feet.

So when His mourning followers heard
The tidings of that faithful word,
Quick went they forth to Galilee,
Their loved and lost once more to see.

On that fair day of Paschal joy
The sunshine was without alloy,
When to their very eyes restored
They looked upon the risen Lord.

The wounds before their eyes displayed
They see in living light arrayed,
And that they see they testify
In open witness fearlessly.

O Christ, the King of gentleness,
Our several hearts do Thou possess,
They we may render all our days
Thy meed of thankfulness and praise.

Maker of all, to Thee we pray,
Fulfill in us Thy joy today;
When death assails, grant, Lord, that we
May share Thy Paschal victory.

To Thee Who, dead, again dost live,
All glory, Lord, Thy people give;
All glory, as is ever meet,
To Father and to Paraclete.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_eye_is_on_the_sparrow.php

Why should I feel discouraged, why should the shadows come,
Why should my heart be lonely, and long for heaven and home,
When Jesus is my portion? My constant friend is He:
His eye is on the sparrow, and I know He watches me;
His eye is on the sparrow, and I know He watches me.

Refrain

I sing because I’m happy,
I sing because I’m free,
For His eye is on the sparrow,
And I know He watches me.

“Let not your heart be troubled," His tender word I hear,
And resting on His goodness, I lose my doubts and fears;
Though by the path He leadeth, but one step I may see;
His eye is on the sparrow, and I know He watches me;
His eye is on the sparrow, and I know He watches me.

Refrain

Whenever I am tempted, whenever clouds arise,
When songs give place to sighing, when hope within me dies,
I draw the closer to Him, from care He sets me free;
His eye is on the sparrow, and I know He watches me;
His eye is on the sparrow, and I know He watches me.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_grace_aboundeth_more.php

O what a wonderful Savior
In Jesus, my Lord, I have found!
Tho’ I had sins without number,
His grace unto me did abound.

Refrain

His grace aboundeth more.
His grace aboundeth more.
Tho’ sin abounded in my heart,
His grace aboundeth more.

When a poor sinner He found me;
No goodness to offer had I.
Often His law I had broken
And merited naught but to die.

Refrain

Nothing of merit possessing,
All helpless before Him I lay;
But, in the precious blood flowing,
He washed all my sin-stains away.

Refrain

How can I keep from rejoicing?
I’ll sing of the joy in my soul,
Praising the love of my Savior
While years of eternity roll.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_grace_is_enough_for_me.php

Just when I am disheartened,
Just when with cares oppressed,
Just when my way is darkest,
Just when I am distressed—
Then is my Savior near me,
He knows my every care;
Jesus will never leave me,
He helps my burdens bear.

Refrain

His grace is enough for me, for me,
His grace is enough for me;
Through sorrow and pain,
Through loss or gain,
His grace is enough for me.

Just when my hopes are vanished,
Just when my friends forsake,
Just when the fight is thickest,
Just when with fear I shake—
Then comes a still small whisper:
“Fear not, My child, I’m near."
Jesus brings peace and comfort,
I love His voice to hear.

Refrain

Just when my tears are flowing,
Just when with anguish bent,
Just when temptation’s hardest,
Just when with sadness rent—
Then comes a thought of comfort:
“I know my Father knows."
Jesus has grace sufficient
To conquer all my foes.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_grace_is_keeping_me.php

I'm in the path of peace
Where pleasures never cease,
And where my soul delights to be;
All worldly loss is gain,
With Jesus I remain,
For saving grace is keeping me.
His grace is keeping me,
His grace is keeping me;
All glory to His name,
His grace is keeping me.

I lean upon His arm,
He shields from ev'ry harm;
Sweet songs I sing because I'm free!
His glory lights the way
To everlasting day,
Praise God, His grace is keeping me.

His grace is keeping me,
His grace is keeping me;
All glory to His name,
His grace is keeping me.

I know that I shall sing
Hosanna to my King
When I His blessed face shall see;
I'll dwell forevermore
On that eternal shore
With Him whose grace is keeping me.

His grace is keeping me,
His grace is keeping me;
All glory to His name,
His grace is keeping me.



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_grace_is_sufficient_for_me.php

“I’ve anchored my soul in the Haven of Rest";
I’ve pillowed my head on the dear Savior’s breast;
I’m trusting His promise of mercy so free;
Fear not, “For My grace is sufficient for thee."

Refrain

At home or abroad, on the land or the sea,
God’s wonderful grace is sufficient for me;
I’m finding it true that where’er I may be,
His grace is sufficient for me,
For me, for me, His grace is sufficient for me.

Wherever my lot upon earth may be cast,
Mid storm and mid tempest He holdeth me fast;
No harm can betide while His dear face I see,
And cling to the hand that was wounded for me.

Refrain

The billows in fury around me may beat;
The “Cleft in the Rock" is my blessèd retreat;
My Shield and Defender forever is He;
The Savior Whose grace is sufficient for me.

Refrain

And when I have finished life’s voyage at last,
When safe in the harbor my anchor is cast,
The theme of my praises forever shall be,
God’s grace, which is always sufficient for me.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_grace_is_true1.php

I've got a song
That I really want to sing
A song of joy (joy, joy) my very being
Oh Lord, if it were not for my God's grace
We would not be here in this place
For His mercy is everlasting
And His grace is true for you (for you, for you)
For He's a rock (rock) and a wheel (wheel) Alpha, Omega (Alpha Omega), start and 
the end
Yes, He's your friend, yeah 

Chorus 1:
He will never leave you nor deceive you
So don't you take for granted what He's done
If it had not been for my God's grace
We would not be here in this place
For His mercy is everlasting
And His grace is true for you (for you, for you)
For you I said that it's true 

Chorus 2:
He will never leave you nor deceive you
So don't you take for granted what He's done
If it were not for my God's grace
We would not be here in this place
For His mercy is everlasting
And His grace is so true, so true (for you, for you)
For His mercy is everlasting
And His grace is so true, I know it's true yeah (for you, for you)
I know it's true (for you, for you) 

His grace is true 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_hand_is_guiding_me.php

As I travel on my way,
To that land more fair than day,
There are beauties all along the road to see;
Heaven’s rays are shining bright,
I’ve no need for worldly light,
For I know my Savior’s hand is guiding me. 

Refrain:
Oh, I know my Savior’s hand is guiding me,
Oh, I know my Savior’s hand is guiding me,
From this world of sin and woe,
To a land where pleasures flow;
Yes, I know my Savior’s hand is guiding me. 

If as on the way I go,
Things arise I do not know,
I will wait upon the Lord that leadeth me—
He will hold me by the hand
Till I reach that happy land,
Yes, I know my Savior’s hand is guiding me. 

When in sickness, trial, or test,
I am called to do my best,
I will trust the Lord the more for victory;
I will lean upon His arm,
He will keep me from all harm,
For I know my Savior’s hand is guiding me. 

When I near the chilling tide,
Looking on the other side,
And my mortal bark shall sink in death’s cold sea,
Jesus then will light the way
To that land more fair than day,
For I know my Savior’s hand is guiding me.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_love.php

Nothing comes between us and God’s love
Nothing below and nothing above
Height nor depth nor any other thing
Separates us from the love of the King

His love (His love)…we cannot comprehend
His love (His love)…it has no end
His love (His love)…makes the sun to shine
His love (His love)…it’s yours and it’s mine

There are those who will turn their back on Him
Say that nothing can take away their sin
But with God we know that’s not the case
Had a plan to save man with redeeming grace

His love (His love)…mends the broken
His love (His love)…keeps me hopin’
His love (His love)…freely given to all
His love (His love)…it’s so wonderful

And there are some who will choose to walk God’s path
But along the way they slip and they slide back
Look up the road, see the Father waits
There’s still a ring and shoes and a robe of grace

His love (His love)…makes a baby smile
His love (His love)…makes it all worthwhile
His love (His love)…makes the flowers grow
His love (His love)…paints the rainbow

Bridge:
Greater love has no man than this
Betrayed by a friend with a kiss
Proved His love while we were yet in sin
So that we might have love without end

(His love)…sent Jesus to the cross
His love (His love)…seeks to save the lost
His love (His love)…paid the debt we owed
His love (His love)…lightens every load

His love (His love)…nothing can compare
His love (His love)…it is always there
His love (His love)…shines in the darkness
He loves (He loves) me regardless

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_love_can_never_fail.php

I do not ask to see the way
My feet will have to tread;
But only that my soul may feed
Upon the living Bread.
’Tis better far that I should walk
By faith close to His side;
I may not know the way I go,
But oh, I know my Guide.

Refrain

His love can never fail,
His love can never fail,
My soul is satisfied to know
His love can never fail.

And if my feet would go astray,
They cannot, for I know
That Jesus guides my falt’ring steps,
As joyfully I go.
And tho’ I may not see His face,
My faith is strong and clear,
That in each hour of sore distress
My Savior will be near.

Refrain

I will not fear, tho’ darkness come
Abroad o’er all the land,
If I may only feel the touch
Of His own loving hand.
And tho’ I tremble when I think
How weak I am, and frail,
My soul is satisfied to know
His love can never fail.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_love_passeth_knowledge.php

There is joy in my soul, for the Savior is mine,
I am wearing the pledge of His Spirit divine;
Every promise by faith through His grace I may claim,
Oh, His love passeth knowledge, all praise to His Name.

Refrain

There is joy in my soul, there is joy in my song,
I am nearing the gates of the bright, shining throng;
And I list to the music of Eden so fair,
Hallelujah to Jesus, I soon shall be there.

There is joy in my soul that will never depart,
My Redeemer has made His abode in my heart;
From the tempter and sin I am kept every hour,
Oh, His love passeth knowledge, so great is its power.

Refrain

There is joy in my soul though the clouds may arise,
Yet the bow of His mercy ne’er fades from the skies;
I am standing by faith where the pure waters glide,
Oh, His love passeth knowledge, so deep and so wide.

Refrain

There is joy in my soul, there is rapture and rest,
In my Savior and Lord I am perfectly blest;
’Twill be only a step ere my feet press the shore,
Then “His love passeth knowledge," I’ll shout evermore.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_loving_thought.php

When Jesus hung on Calvary,
He thought of you and me;
’Twas love that held Him there to be
A sacrifice for you, for me. 

Refrain:
He thought of you, He thought of me,
While hanging there in agony;
Oh! wonder-love to you and me!
It broke His heart on Calvary. 

He wore a crown on Calvary,
He thought of you and me;
He knew His thorny crown would be
A diadem for you, for me. 

On that dread cross of Calvary
He thought of you and me;
He thought not of His agony;
His heart went out to you, to me. 

At last He cried on Calvary,
He thought of you and me;
“ ’Tis finished for eternity!"
Oh! blessed cry for you, for me. 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_mighty_hand.php

I am saved from sin, I have peace within,
And I walk with Jesus day by day;
O His hand so strong, holds me all day long,
And with Him I will not go astray.

Refrain

He will hold me with His mighty hand!
He will hold me with His mighty hand!
In temptation He will help me stand!
For He will hold me with His mighty hand.

Many passed me by, heeding not my cry,
But the Savior heard and rescued me;
I was lost and blind, Jesus was so kind,
Lo, He touched my eyes and now I see.

Refrain

There’s a promise sure, and it shall endure,
“Lo, I will be with thee all the way";
And though foes assail, I shall still prevail,
For I know He helps me watch and pray.

Refrain

There is sweeter peace, there is perfect peace,
And my Father’s Word is wondrous dear;
There is mighty pow’r, for each trying hour,
There is love that “castteth out all fear!"

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_name_is_wonderful.php

His Name is Wonderful
His Name is Wonderful
His Name is Wonderful
Jesus My Lord 

He is the Mighty King
Master of everything
His Name is Wonderful
Jesus My Lord 

He’s the Great shepherd
The Rock of All Ages
Almighty God is He 

Bow down before Him
Love and adore Him
His Name is Wonderful
Jesus My Lord

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_oceans_all_rumble_and_batter_his_shore.php

His oceans all rumble and batter His shore,
But He will be new when its waves are no more.
His mountains reach skyward to touch His sweet face;
His forests burst forth as He showers their place.

The mighty Leviathan leaps in His seas,
The eagle mounts up on the joy of His breeze.
The creatures of earth borrow life from His hand,
Their days are all numbered by His firm command.

Eternity springs from His Infinite Mind—
All time and all space from His fingers unwind,
His intricate, limitless, unbounded skill
Spins threads of His sovereign, inscrutable will.

The thunder of Sinai resounds in our ears,
The judgment of God stirs the deepest of fears!
But, awesome and wondrous—more staggering still—
The flashes of lightning from Calvary’s hill!

But O! How mighty, how perfect, how free,
How blessèd, how precious, how lovely is He!
And O! How grand, and how sweet to behold
The trophies of grace He has won from of old!

A radiant triumph illumines His face!
He strides to His throne, the Colossus of Grace!
He sits, and His Father proclaims Him True Son!
His strife is now over; His battle is done.

We bow, we adore, we fall down at His throne,
He gathers us into His arms as His own!
He seats us in glory beside Him above,
To crown His achievement with splendors of love!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_people.php

The people are calling to the Great I Am
His people are yearning for the works of His mighty hand
Anticipating, patiently waiting
For the Spirit to move across the land 

His people are kneeling; they are on their knees in prayer
His people are bringing their each and every care
In prayer believing, His grace receiving
And the Spirit we know is always there 

Chorus:
We know, oh yes, we know
The Spirit is moving across the land
We bow, oh yes, we bow
Before the works of the Master's mighty hand 

His people are praising His holy name on high
His people on wings, on wings of love will fly
And we will praise Him, redeemed we raise Him
So that others may see His awesome might 

Repeat Chorus (x2) 

Before the works of the Master's mighty hand 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_promise_to_me.php

Darkness may o’ertake me and my song forsake me,
But alone I never shall be;
For the Friend beside me promised He would guide me,
And will keep His promise to me.

Refrain

He will keep his promise to me,
All the way with me He will go;
He has never broken any promise spoken;
He will keep His promise, I know.

Should misfortune meet me, friends may fail to greet me,
But if true to Jesus I stay
He will still uphold me, let His love enfold me
Every dreary mile of the way.

Refrain

How the thought enthralls me, that whate’er befalls me
One will always love me the same;
Not a trial ever causes Him to sever
From the ones who honor His Name.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_righteousness.php

God made Him who had no sin
So that we might become His Righteousness
Instead of ourselves He offered Him
So that we might become His Righteousness
So that we might become His Righteousness
So that we might become His Righteousness
Holy God was offered for us
So that we might become His Righteousness
So that we might become His Righteousness
It's hard to believe we can be spiritually well
So that we might become His Righteousness
The loving God tasted the essence of hell
So that we might become His Righteousness
So that we might become His Righteousness
So that we might become His Righteousness
Holy God was offered for us
So that we might become His Righteousness

God in the flesh lived as a man
Will of the Father, fulfilling His plan
Jesus condemned, taking our place
Now we are in Him and we'll see His face

Repeat first verse

Holy God was offered for us
So that we might become His Righteousness (Become His Righteousness)
So that we might become His Righteousness (Become His Righteousness)

We might become His Righteousness (Become His Righteousness) (repeat and fade)

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_strength_is_perfect.php

I can do all things through Christ
Who gives me strength;
But sometimes I wonder
What He can do through me?
No great success to show
No glory on my own
Yet, in my weakness
He is there to let me know.

His strength is perfect
When our strength is gone.
He'll carry us
When we can't carry on.
Raised in His power
The weak become strong.
His strength is perfect
His strength is perfect.

We can only know
The power That He holds
When we truly see
How deep our weakness goes;
His strength in us begins
Where ours comes to an end
He hears our humble cry
And proves again...

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_voice_i_hear.php

I cannot tell when the thunders peal,
How fiercely the storm may rage,
Nor how dense are the shades of the night that steal
O’er the path of my pilgrimage;
But I know, with my Savior always near,
As that night on the Galilee,
The tempest will cease when His voice I hear,
And the darkest shadows flee. 

I cannot see through the darkest clouds
His image so wondrous fair,
And forget sometimes, when the gloom enshrouds,
The mansion awaiting there;
But if on the wings of faith I soar,
In the strength of His word alone,
My soul can drink till I want no more,
From fountains of love unknown. 

I cannot drink one draught of pain
From the cup once drained for me,
Or bear the heat on the desert plain,
Nor the grief of Gethsemane;
But I know, if His cross I meekly bear,
If I labor, and watch, and pray,
His suff’rings I a part may share
From thorns in the narrow way. 

I cannot see for the veil between
The beautiful gates ajar,
The streets of gold, and the living green,
On the banks of the river there;
But I know, somewhere, on that heavenly strand,
Is a mansion, and robe, and crown,
Preserved by the Savior’s loving hand
Till my work on earth is done. 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_voice_as_the_sound_of_the_dulcimer_sweet.php

His voice, as the sound of the dulcimer sweet, is heard through the shadows of 
death;
The cedars of Lebanon bow at His feet, the air is perfumed with His breath.
His lips as the fountain of righteousness flow, that waters the garden of grace,
From which their salvation the Gentiles shall know, and bask in the smiles of 
His face.

O! Thou in Whose presence my soul takes delight, on Whom in affliction I call;
My Comfort by day, and my Song in the night, my Hope, my Salvation, my All—
Where dost Thou at noontide resort with Thy sheep, to feed on the pastures of 
love?
Say, why in the valley of death should I weep, or ’lone in the wilderness rove?

O! why should I wander an alien from thee, and cry in the desert for bread?
Thy foes will rejoice when my sorrows they see, and smile at the tears I have 
shed.
Ye daughters of Zion, declare, have you seen the Star that on Israel shone?
Say if in your tents my Belovèd hath been, and where, with His flock, is He 
gone?

“What is thy Belovèd, thou dignified fair? What excellent beauties hath He?
His charms and perfections be pleased to declare, that we may embrace Him with 
thee."
This is my Belovèd, His form is divine; His vestments shed odor around;
The locks on His head are as grapes on the vine, when autumn with plenty is 
crowned.

The roses of Sharon, the lilies that grow in the vales, on the banks of the 
streams
On His cheeks in the beauty of excellence blow; His eyes are as quivers of 
beams.
His voice as the sound of the dulcimer sweet is heard through the shadows of 
death;
The cedars of Lebanon bow at His feet, the air is perfumed with His breath.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_way_with_thee.php

Would you live for Jesus, and be always pure and good?
Would you walk with Him within the narrow road?
Would you have Him bear your burden, carry all your load?
Let Him have His way with thee.

Refrain

His power can make you what you ought to be;
His blood can cleanse your heart and make you free;
His love can fill your soul, and you will see
’Twas best for Him to have His way with thee.

Would you have Him make you free, and follow at His call?
Would you know the peace that comes by giving all?
Would you have Him save you, so that you can never fall?
Let Him have His way with thee.

Refrain

Would you in His kingdom find a place of constant rest?
Would you prove Him true in providential test?
Would you in His service labor always at your best?
Let Him have His way with thee.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_wide_dominion_shall_extend.php

His wide dominion shall extend
From sea to utmost sea,
And unto earth’s remotest bounds
His peaceful rule shall be.

The tribes that in the desert dwell
Shall bow before His throne;
His enemies shall be subdued,
And He shall rule alone.

The kings shall come from distant lands
And islands of the sea;
Oblations they shall bring to Him
And wait on bended knee.

Yea, all the kings shall bow to Him,
His rule all nations hail;
He will regard the poor man’s cry
When other helpers fail.

The poor and needy He shall spare,
And save their souls from fear;
He shall redeem them from all wrong,
Their life to Him is dear.

So they shall live and bring to Him
Their gifts of finest gold;
For Him shall constant prayer be made,
His praise each day be told.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_word_was_with_power.php

There’s pow’r, mighty pow’r in the word of the King;
He speaks, and the captive is free;
The lips of the dumb with rejoicing shall sing;
O speak, blessèd Savior, to me!
Refrain

O the pow’r, mighty pow’r,
In the word of my Savior and King!
O the pow’r, mighty pow’r!
For Jesus salvation shall bring.

There’s pow’r, mighty pow’r in the pardoning word;
He said, “Go, and sin now no more!"
How sweet was the hour when forgiveness I heard,
And mercy had opened the door!

Refrain

There’s pow’r, mighty pow’r in the word of the Lord,
And strength He will give, when we pray,
To follow His footsteps, His goodness record,
And walk in love’s beautiful way.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_words_are_true.php

What wonderful words in the Gospel of grace
Our loving Redeemer has giv’n!
How happy are they who in spirit are pure,
For theirs is the kingdom of Heav’n!

Refrain

Tho’ all that is earthly will fade,
And vanish away from our view,
We know that as sure as the Savior lives,
The words He has spoken are true.

He maketh the lilies to bloom in the field,
And shelters the bird in its nest;
He calleth the weary to come unto Him,
And find the sweet blessing of rest.

Refrain

To those that are thirsting and longing for Him,
The water of life He will give;
And they that with patience endure to the end,
Forever in glory shall live.

Refrain

Then why are we fearful, and where is our faith?
His own He will never forsake;
And tho’ He may lead them where waters are deep,
His promise He never will break.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_yoke_is_easy.php

The Lord is my Shepherd; I shall not want.
He maketh me down to lie
In pastures green He leadeth me
The quiet waters by.

Refrain

His yoke is easy; His burden is light.
I’ve found it so; I’ve found it so.
He leadeth me by day and by night
Where living waters flow.

My soul crieth out: “Restore me again,
And give me the strength to take
The narrow path of righteousness,
E’en for His own Name’s sake."

Refrain

Yea, tho’ I should walk the valley of death,
Yet why should I fear from ill?
For Thou art with me, and Thy rod
And staff me comfort still.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_banner_over_me.php

He brought me to his banqueting table
(Brought me to his banqueting table)
He brought me to his banqueting table
(Brought me to his banqueting table)
And His banner over me is love
I am my beloved's and He is mine
(I am my beloved's and He is mine)
Yes, I am my beloved's and He is mine
(I am my beloved's and He is mine)

And His banner over me is love
Yes, His banner over me is love

And we can feel the love of God in this place
We believe your goodness we receive Your grace
We delight ourselves at Your table, oh God
You do all things well, just look at our lives

© 1991 Mercy Publishing
CCLI# 1596342
Album: Refiner's Fire
25 Top Vineyard Worship Songs



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_banner_over_me_is_love.php

He is the Shepherd and we are the sheep,
His banner over me is love.
He is the Shepherd and we are the sheep,
His banner over me is love.
He is the Shepherd and we are the sheep,
His banner over me is love.
His banner over me is love! 
He is the Vine and we are the branches,
His banner over me is love.
He is the Vine and we are the branches,
His banner over me is love.
He is the Vine and we are the branches,
His banner over me is love.
His banner over me is love! 

He calls us to His Banqueting Table,
His banner over me is love.
He calls us to His Banqueting Table,
His banner over me is love.
He calls us to His Banqueting Table,
His banner over me is love.
His banner over me is love!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_be_the_victors_name.php

His be the Victor's Name
Who fought the fight alone;
Triumphant saints no honor claim;
Their conquest was His own.

By weakness and defeat
He won the reed and crown;
Trod all the foes beneath His feet
By being trodden down.

He hell in hell laid low;
Made sin, He sin o'erthrew;
Bowed to the grave, destroyed it so,
And death, by dying, slew.

What tho' the'accuser roar
Of ills that I have done;
I know them well, and thousands more;
Jehovah findeth none.

Bless, bless the Conqu'ror slain,
Slain by divine decree!
Who lived, who died, who lives again,
For thee, my soul, for thee. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_loving_kindness.php

Give thanks unto the Lord for He is good
Give thanks unto the Lord His mercy endures
Give thanks unto the Lord for He is good
Give thanks unto the Lord His mercy endures

And His loving kindness will last forever
His love is endless and has no measure

The Lord is our strength and our salvation
And He will remain our unending grace
The Lord is our strength and our salvation
And He will remain our unending grace

Lord we give thanks to You
Forever Your love will endure
Lord we give thanks to You
Forever Your love will endure
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/his_rich_abundant_grace.php

Before the voice of Heaven spoke, before the earth was framed,
Within the mighty heart of God were we, His loved ones, named.
That in the pleasure of His will as He alone had planned,
We might thro' Him be full redeemed and in His presence stand.
So God within His kingdom has reserved for us a place,
That we might praise the glory of His rich, abundant grace.

Forgiven by the Saviour's grace, and ransomed by His love,
With wonder we behold the will of Him who reigns above
That someday, in a mighty choir may all creation sing
And worship with a swelling sound their great, eternal King.
So heavens' beings shall arise and men from ev'ry place
To praise the matchless glory of His rich, abundant grace.

O Spirit of immortal truth, interpreter divine,
Salvation's holy evidence, redemption's sacred sign.
Renew our cold and sinful hearts, our inner zeal inspire;
Thou token of eternal hope, descend in holy fire!
So guide us in the truth of God until we see His face
And praise Him for the glory of His rich, abundant grace. 
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hold_fast.php

Hold fast to the Savior, He loves you still,
Hold fast to the promise He will fulfill;
Hold fast, ever trusting you shall receive,
Hold fast, do not waver, His Word believe. 

Refrain:
Hold fast, hold fast,
Hold to the Savior, He’s all in all;
Hold fast, hold fast,
Hold fast to the promise, you’ll never fall. 

Hold fast to your covenant made with God,
And trust for the cleansing in Jesus’ blood;
Hold fast for the strength you shall need in life,
He surely will help you amid the strife. 

Hold fast, never doubting, withstand the foe,
Put on the whole armor and onward go;
Determined to conquer in Jesus’ might,
Ne’er run from a battle, but face the fight. 

Hold fast for that beautiful land in view,
Hold fast for the crown that’s awaiting you;
Hold fast for the meeting of loved ones there,
Hold fast for the bliss they have gone to share. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hold_fast_till_I_come.php

Oh, spirit, o’erwhelmed by thy failures and fears,
Look up to thy Lord, though with trembling and tears;
Weak Faith, to thy call seem the heav’ns only dumb?
To thee is the message, “Hold fast till I come."

Refrain

Hold fast till I come, hold fast till I come,
A bright crown awaits thee; Hold fast till I come.

Hold fast when the world would allure thee to sin;
Hold fast when the tempter assails from within;
In sunshine or sadness, in gain or in loss,
To falter were madness; oh, cling to the cross.

Refrain

Thy Savior is coming in tenderest love,
To make up His jewels and bear them above:
Oh, child, in thine anguish, despairing or dumb,
Remember the message, “Hold fast till I come."


Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hold_on.php

Jesus said He'll always be there 
Thought you could do it
On your own
Thought you could do it
By yourself
But the Lord had other plans for you
He decided He would see you through (He would see you through)
Yes, through it all
So when tomorrow
Seems like forever
Don't be discouraged
Because the Lord will never leave you weak
Your strength will come
When He has said it's time for you to stand alone (stand alone)
You can stand (can stand) alone
Don't worry about it (don't worry)
Know that He won't leave you (oh no) lonely (He won't leave you lonely, He'll be 
right there) (no no, hey oh)
Oh, just lean on Him (just lean)
Never letting go of His arms (never let go of His arms)
When you're burdened down
All you gotta do is hold… 

Chorus 1:
Hold on… tomorrow's coming (tomorrow's coming)
Hold on… (a new day) a new day's near (try to hold on)
Be strong (be strong yeah)… take new courage (take courage)
For Jesus (for Jesus) said (said He would) He'll (said He'd always)…
Always be there (He will be there) 

When everyday problems
Turn into mountains
Don't you give up (don't you give up, no)
You just take it one step at a time
Cause you know God is there (right there)
And surely there is nothing
That will ever tear you away (nothing can tear you away)
Never tear you away
You've got to fight and fight
God as your guiding light (oh yeah)
He's your salvation, yes He is
Where He is, there lies your (strength) strength and power to overcome 
(Tears of pain) Tears of pain, shadows of your sinful past (shadows of your 
past)
That still remain
Just reach out (reach out)
Always holding on to hope (keep reaching out (to hope, yeah) (He will never 
fail) for hope)
No, Jesus never fails (no won't fail ya)
Even in the midst of a heavy, heavy, heavy storm (in the midst of the storm 
(storm), in the midst of the rain (rain), His love is the same (same))
His love prevails
(Oh) and remember to hold on… 

Chorus 2:
Hold on (yeah, yeah)… tomorrow's coming (tomorrow's on it's way, hay (said a new 
day is near))
Hold on… (Oh yeah, my dear (you gotta hold on) right here) a new day's near (got 
to hold on (all you gotta do is be strong (yeah))
Be strong (be strong cause)… take new courage (strength's a coming, coming, 
coming) (take courage)
For Jesus said (for Jesus is coming) He'll (oh yes He is, yeah)…
Always be there (always, always be there) 

Hold on (hold on), hold on (hold on)
Hold on (yeah), hold on (every day say every day say every day)
Hold on (yeah), hold on (He's on His way, soon and very soon)
Hold on, hold on (yeah, yeah yeah yeah (oh))
Hold on, hold on
(Come on and) Hold on, (come on and, come on and, come on and) hold on (be 
strong, be strong, hey)
Hold on, hold on
Hold on, hold on (even in the midst of a heavy storm you gotta hold on)
Hold on, hold on (gotta hold, gotta hold, gotta hold, gotta hold on)
Hold on, hold on
Hold on, hold on


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hold_the_fort.php

Ho, my comrades! see the signal waving in the sky!
Reinforcements now appearing, victory is nigh.

Refrain

“Hold the fort, for I am coming," Jesus signals still;
Wave the answer back to Heaven, “By Thy grace we will."

See the mighty host advancing, Satan leading on;
Mighty ones around us falling, courage almost gone!

Refrain

See the glorious banner waving! Hear the trumpet blow!
In our Leader’s Name we triumph over ev’ry foe.

Refrain

Fierce and long the battle rages, but our help is near;
Onward comes our great Commander, cheer, my comrades, cheer!

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hold_thou_my_hand.php

Hold Thou my hand; so weak I am, and helpless,
I dare not take one step without Thy aid;
Hold Thou my hand; for then, O loving Savior,
No dread of ill shall make my soul afraid.

Hold Thou my hand, and closer, closer draw me
To Thy dear self—my hope, my joy, my all;
Hold Thou my hand, lest haply I should wander,
And, missing Thee, my trembling feet should fall.

Hold Thou my hand; the way is dark before me
Without the sunlight of Thy face divine;
But when by faith I catch its radiant glory,
What heights of joy, what rapturous songs are mine!

Hold Thou my hand, that when I reach the margin
Of that lone river Thou didst cross for me,
A heavenly light may flash along its waters,
And every wave like crystal bright shall be.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hold_to_gods_unchanging_hand.php

Time is filled with swift transition,
Naught of earth unmoved can stand,
Build your hopes on things eternal,
Hold to God’s unchanging hand. 

Refrain:
Hold to God’s unchanging hand,
Hold to God’s unchanging hand;
Build your hopes on things eternal,
Hold to God’s unchanging hand. 

Trust in Him who will not leave you,
Whatsoever years may bring,
If by earthly friends forsaken
Still more closely to Him cling. 

Covet not this world’s vain riches
That so rapidly decay,
Seek to gain the heav’nly treasures,
They will never pass away. 

When your journey is completed,
If to God you have been true,
Fair and bright the home in glory
Your enraptured soul will view.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hold_up_the_grand_old_bible.php

Hold up the grand old Bible to the people!
Deny it or neglect it never!
Unfailing it has stood the test of ages,
And it shall stand unchanged forever!

Refrain

O blessèd book, the only book,
The pow’rs of earth can change it never!
The test of fire and flood through ages it hath stood,
And it shall stand unchanged forever.

Hold up the grand old Bible and proclaim it
The Word of God by prophets spoken;
His seal imprinted glows upon its pages,
And not a precept can be broken.

Refrain

Hold up the grand old Bible of our fathers,
And send it unto ev’ry nation;
It is the cloud by day, the fire in darkness,
That lights the way unto salvation.

Refrain

Hold up the grand old Bible, proudly own it,
Believe, and search its sacred pages;
There you may find the way of life eternal—
Immortal life through endless ages.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hole_in_the_world.php

Chorus 1:
There's a hole in the world tonight
There's a cloud of fear and sorrow
There's a hole in the world tonight
Don't let there be a hole in the world tomorrow
They say that anger is just love disappointed
They say that love is just a state of mind
But all this fightin' over who will be anointed
Oh how can people be so blind

Repeat Chorus 1

Oh they tell me there's a place over yonder
Cool water running through the burning sand
Until we learn to love one another
We will never reach the Promised Land

Repeat Chorus 1

Repeat Chorus 1 and Verse 1 (together)

Chorus 2:
There's a hole in the world tonight (hold in the world)
There's a cloud of fear and sorrow (fear and sorrow)
There's a hole in the world tonight
Don't let there be a hole in the world tomorrow

Chorus 3:
There's a hole in the world tonight (there's a hole, there's a hole in the 
world)
There's a cloud of fear and sorrow (cloud of fear and sorrow)
There's a hole in the world tonight (there's a hole)
Don't let there be a hole in the world tomorrow (don't let there be a hole)

Chorus 4:
There's a hole in the world tonight (hey)
There's a cloud of fear and sorrow (oh, there's a cloud of fear and sorrow)
There's a hole in the world tonight (there's a hole in the world tonight)
Don't let there be a hole in the world tomorrow (no no no, no no no)

There's a hole in the world tonight
Don't let there be a hole in the world tomorrow



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holiness.php

Beautiful holiness! theme of the Bible,
Filling my heart with its riches of grace;
Cleansing and keeping me ever from evil,
Fitting my soul for that heavenly place. 

Beautiful holiness! fair as the morning,
Sparkling with jewels of purity bright;
Rubies of grace in their splendid adorning,
Cover me here as I walk in the light. 

Beautiful holiness! coming from heaven,
Likeness of God and the angels above;
Jesus, the way, and the Bible, are given—
Wonderful favor through infinite love! 

Beautiful holiness! blissful, eternal,
Surely without it no man seeth God;
It will prepare us for glories immortal—
This is the way our dear Savior hath trod.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holiness_unto_the_lord.php

Holiness dwells in the temple of God,
Adorning its walls within;
Those who would enter this blessed abode
Must turn from the way of sin. 

Refrain:
Holiness, holiness unto the Lord!
Ever in triumph we’ll sing,
Standing secure on the rock of His word—
Holiness unto our King! 

Holiness reigns in the hearts of the saints,
A welcome, abiding guest,
Giving them freedom from sinful restraints,
Affording supernal rest. 

Jesus has promised His power of old
To cleanse us from every sin,
Purging the dross and refining the gold,
And taking away the tin. 

Jesus lived holy while walking below,
The tempter He overcame:
Those who at last into heaven would go
Must live in this world the same. 

Holiness, holiness unto the Lord!
Is carved on the “horses bells";
Paradise pure in our hearts is restored
When holiness in us dwells. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holiness_becomes_thy_house.php

Holiness becomes Thy house,
’Tis Thou who dost dwell in light;
Thou begirt with majesty,
Gird us with truth,
And with Thy great might.

Send Thou forth Thy power and love,
In beauty of holiness;
We would here commune with Thee,
Eternal God,
Be Thou near to bless.

O supreme and perfect One,
O Lord, praise to Thee is due;
Clothe us in the grace of love,
Maintain Thy church,
To Thy service true.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy.php

Chorus 1:
Holy! Holy! Holy is the Lord!
The all powerful God
Holy! Holy! Holy is the Lord!
Who was and is and soon will be coming
Who was and is and soon will be coming 
Our Lord and our God you are worthy
To receive glory, honor, and power
You created all things and by your choice
Everything exists by your hand 

Singing... 

Chorus 2:
Holy! Holy! Holy is the Lord!
The all powerful God (Holy is the Lord)
Holy! Holy! Holy is the Lord!
Who was and is and soon will be coming (coming Lord)
Who was and is and soon will be coming (coming Lord, coming Lord, coming Lord, 
coming Lord) 

To the One who sits on the heavenly throne
And to the Holy Lamb that was slain
Be praises and honor and glory
And power forever and ever! 

Singing...
Repeat Chorus 2 

Lord we will pray in your Spirit
And rejoice in this vision of heaven
As we stand at your throne and sing praises
With the saved of all times and all nations 

Singing...
Repeat Chorus 2 (x2) 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_and_awesome.php

Holy and awesome is Your name
Splendid, majestic are all Your ways
Gracious, compassionate are You Lord
Your praise endures forevermore
Your praise endures forevermore


Worthy is the Lamb that was slain
To receive power and riches and strength
Honor and glory and blessings are Yours
We'll sing Your praise forevermore
We'll sing Your praise forevermore

(repeat first verse)

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_and_reverened_is_the_name.php

Holy and reverend is the Name
Of our eternal King:
Thrice holy Lord, the angels cry;
Thrice holy, let us sing.

Heaven’s brightest lamps with Him compared,
How mean they look and dim!
The fairest angels have their spots,
When once compared with Him.

Holy is He in all his works,
And truth is His delight;
But sinners and their wicked ways
Shall perish from His sight.

The deepest reverence of the mind,
Pay, O my soul, to God;
Lift with thy hands a holy heart
To His sublime abode.

With sacred awe pronounce His Name,
Whom words nor thoughts can reach;
A broken heart shall please Him more
Than the best forms of speech.

Thou holy God! preserve my soul
From all pollution free;
The pure in heart are Thy delight,
And they Thy face shall see.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_as_thou_o_lord_is_none.php

Holy as Thou, O Lord, is none;
Thy holiness is all Thine own;
A drop of that unbounded sea
Is ours—a drop derived from Thee.

And when Thy purity we share,
Thine only glory we declare;
And, humbled into nothing, own,
Holy and pure is God alone.

Sole, self-existing God and Lord,
By all Thy heav’nly hosts adored,
Let all on earth bow down to Thee,
And own Thy peerless majesty.

Thy power unparalleled confess,
Established on the Rock of peace;
The Rock that never shall remove,
The Rock of pure, almighty, love.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_bible_book_divine.php

Holy Bible, Book divine,
Precious treasure, thou art mine;
Mine to tell me whence I came;
Mine to teach me what I am.

Mine to chide me when I rove;
Mine to show a Savior’s love;
Mine thou art to guide and guard;
Mine to punish or reward.

Mine to comfort in distress;
Suffering in this wilderness;
Mine to show, by living faith,
Man can triumph over death.

Mine to tell of joys to come,
And the rebel sinner’s doom;
O thou holy Book divine,
Precious treasure, thou art mine.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here are Burton’s original lyrics:

Holy Bible, book Divine,
Precious treasure, thou art mine;
Mine to tell me whence I came;
Mine to teach me what I am.

Mine to chide me when I rove;
Mine to shew a Saviour’s love;
Mine art thou to guide my feet;
Mine to judge, condemn, acquit.

Mine to comfort in distress;
If the Holy Spirit bless;
Mine to shew, by living faith,
Man can triumph over death.

Mine to tell of joys to come,
And the rebel sinner’s doom;
Holy Bible, book Divine,
Precious treasure, thou art mine.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_city.php

You know that I'm gonna view that holy city
Oh, I'm gonna view that holy city one of these days, Hallelujah!
I'm gonna view that holy city
I'm gonna view that holy city one of these days, one of these days 
You know that I'm gonna meet my loving Jesus
Oh, I'm gonna meet my loving Jesus one of these days, Hallelujah!
I'm gonna meet my loving Jesus
I'm gonna view that holy city, (and I will) meet my loving Jesus one of these 
days, one of these days 

You know that I'm gonna sit at the welcome table
Well now, I'm gonna sit at the welcome table one of these days, Hallelujah!
I'm gonna sit at the welcome table
I'm gonna view that holy city, (and I will) meet my loving Jesus, (we're gonna) 
sit at the welcome table one of these days, one of these days 

You know that I'm gonna feast on milk and honey
Well now, I'm gonna feast on milk and honey one of these days, Hallelujah!
I'm gonna feast on milk and honey
I'm gonna view that holy city, (and I will) meet my loving Jesus, (we're gonna) 
sit at the welcome table, (and we will) feast on milk and honey one of these 
days, one of these days 

"Swing Down Sweet Chariot" Chorus:
Why don't you swing down sweet chariot
Stop and let me ride
Oh swing down chariot
Stop and let me ride
Oh rock me Lord, please rock me Lord
Calm and easy
I’ve got a home on the other side 

Repeat "Swing Down Sweet Chariot" Chorus 

You know that I’ve got a home now
I'm so glad that I’ve got a home on the other side 

You know that I'm gonna view that holy city
Well now now now, I'm gonna view that holy city one of these days
Well, you know that I'm gonna view that holy city
I'm gonna view that holy city, (and I will) sing and never get tired, (we're 
gonna) sing and never get tired, (and we will) sing and never get tired, (we're 
gonna) sing and never get tired one of these days, one of these days, one of 
these old days 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_father_hear_me.php

Holy Father, hear me;
thou art my defender,
be thou ever near me,
loving, true and tender.

Jesus, blessèd Savior,
Lord of life and glory,
grant me now thy favor
as I kneel before thee.

Comforter benignest,
who abiding in me
all my need divinest,
move me, draw me, win me.

Holy, holy, holy,
come, and leave me never,
thine abode most lowly,
only thine for ever.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_father_bless_us.php

Holy Father, bless us
As the day we close,
And the night’s refreshing
Grant us in repose.

All the day Thy presence
Made our hearts to burn,
As we heard Thy counsel,
Felt Thy love’s concern.

So tonight we pray Thee
Leave us not alone;
But through light and shadow
Keep us as Thine own.

Grant to us in slumber
To be very near,
In Thy goodness quelling
Needless doubt and fear.

When at length the dawning
Sweeps the night away,
Help us rise triumphant,
Worthy of the day.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_father_cheer_our_way.php

Holy Father, cheer our way
With Thy love’s perpetual ray;
Grant us every closing day
Light at evening time.

Holy Savior, calm our fears
When earth’s brightness disappears;
Grant us in our later years
Light at evening time.

Holy Spirit, be Thou nigh
When in mortal pains we lie;
Grant us, as we come to die,
Light at evening time.

Holy, blessèd Trinity,
Darkness is not dark to Thee;
Those Thou keepest always see
Light at evening time.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_father_god_almighty.php

Holy Father, God almighty,

Holy Jesus, God adored,
Holy Spirit, God of comfort,
Holy, holy, holy Lord!
All our praises rise before You,
God who made all that exists.
As You did with ancient offerings,
Send Your Spirit on our gifts.

You gave us Your body, Jesus,
On the night You were betrayed—
Bread of heaven, earthly feasting—
Sacrifice for sins now paid.
And You gave Your blood to nourish
Body, spirit and the soul—
Cup of blessing that did heal us—
Liquid that did make us whole.

We recall Your incarnation!
We recall Your earthly life!
We recall Your crucifixion
Full of agony and strife!
We recall Your resurrection
From the grave though sealed with stone!
This Your victory over death, Lord,
Gives us promise for our own.

And recalling Your ascension,
We entreat You and implore
That You soon return and take us
To be with You evermore!
Send Your Spirit to be with us
As we pilgrim through this life.
Keep your church and all our loved ones
From all evil and all strife.

With the saints and with the angels
We are longing, Lord, to be,
Where with praise and adoration,
Our Redeemer we shall see.
Through and with and in Christ Jesus,
In the Spirit’s unity,
Be all honor to the Father
Now and through eternity!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_father_great_creator.php

Holy Father, great Creator,
Source of mercy, love and peace,
Look upon the Mediator,
Clothe us with His righteousness;
Heav’nly Father, heav’nly Father,
Through the Savior hear and bless!

Holy Jesus, Lord of glory,
Whom angelic hosts proclaim,
While we hear Thy wondrous story,
Meet and worship in Thy Name,
Dear Redeemer, dear Redeemer,
In our hearts Thy peace proclaim.

Holy Spirit, Sanctifier,
Come with unction from above,
Raise our hearts to raptures higher,
Fill them with the Savior’s love.
Source of comfort, source of comfort,
Cheer us with the Savior’s love.

God the Lord, through every nation
Let Thy wondrous mercies shine,
In the song of Thy salvation
Every tongue and race combine,
Great Jehovah, great Jehovah,
Form our hearts and make them Thine.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_father_hear_my_cry.php

Holy Father, hear my cry;
Holy Savior, bend Thine ear;
Holy Spirit, come Thou nigh;
Father, Savior, Spirit, hear.

Father, save me from my sin;
Savior, I Thy mercy crave;
Gracious Spirit, make me clean:
Father, Savior, Spirit, save.

Father, let me taste Thy love;
Savior, fill my soul with peace;
Spirit, come my heart to move:
Father, Son, and Spirit, bless.

Father, Son, and Spirit—Thou
One Jehovah, shed abroad
All Thy grace within me now;
Be my Father and my God.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_father_in_thy_mercy.php

Holy Father, in Thy mercy,

Hear our anxious prayer.
Keep our loved ones, now far distant,
’Neath Thy care.

Jesus, Savior, let Thy presence
Be their light and guide;
Keep, oh, keep them, in their weakness,
At Thy side.

When in sorrow, when in danger,
When in loneliness,
In Thy love look down and comfort
Their distress.

May the joy of Thy salvation
Be their strength and stay;
May they love and may they praise Thee
Day by day.

Holy Spirit, let Thy teaching
Sanctify their life;
Send Thy grace, that they may conquer
In the strife.

Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,
God the One in Three,
Bless them, guide them, save them, keep them
Near to Thee.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_father_thou_hast_given.php

Holy Father, Thou hast given
Holy truth from highest heaven;
Words of counsel wise and pure,
Words of promise bright and sure;
Light that guides us back to Thee,
Back to peace and purity.

Clearer than the sun at noon,
Fairer than the silver moon,
Through the clouds and through the night,
Ever shines this heavenly light;
Help us, Lord, to lift our eyes
Take its guidance and be wise.

Here the wisdom from above
Beaming holiness and love,
Kindling hope, dispelling fear,
Shines to save; for Christ is here:
Knowing, trusting Him, we come
From our wanderings gladly home.

Blessèd Savior, Light divine,
Thou hast bid us rise and shine;
Grant Thy grace, and we shall be
Children of the day in Thee,
Showing all around the road
Back to life, and love, and God.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_fellowship.php

Sweet fellowship, thy crystal tide,
Flows joyful in our souls;
Baptized in one, naught can divide,
While heav’nly peace controls. 

Refrain:
O brethren, how our spirits blend
In fellowship so dear;
Though sundered far by God’s command,
We feel you still so near. 

God over all, and through us all,
In floods of blissful light,
Is fellowship in every soul
That’s pure in heaven’s sight. 

O fellowship, my brethren dear,
In bonds of perfect love;
How blest the seal of union here
With all the saints above! 

This fellowship with Father, Son,
And all who love the Lord,
Is heaven here on earth begun,
’Tis Paradise restored. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_ghost_illuminator.php

Holy Ghost, Illuminator,
shed thy beams upon eyes,
help us to look up with Stephen,
and to see, beyond the skies,
where the Son of Man in glory
standing is at God's right hand,
beckoning on his martyr army,
succoring his faithful band.

See him, who is gone before us,
heavenly mansions to prepare;
see him, who is ever pleading
for us with prevailing prayer;
see him, who with sound of trumpet
and with his angelic train,
summoning the world to judgment,
on the clouds will come again.

Lift us up from earth to heaven,
give us wings of faith and love,
gales of holy aspirations
wafting us to realms above;
that, with hearts and minds uplifted,
we with Christ our Lord may dwell,
where he sits enthroned in glory
in his heavenly citadel.

So at last, when he appeareth,
we from out our graves may spring,
with our youth renewed like eagles,
flocking round our heavenly King,
caught up on the clouds of heaven,
and may meet him in the air,
rise to realms where he is reigning,
and may reign for ever there.

Glory be to God the Father,
glory be to God the Son,
dying, risen, ascending for us,
who the heavenly realm has won.
Glory to the Holy Spirit;
to One God in Persons Three
glory both in earth and heaven,
glory, endless glory be.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_ghost_we_offer_here.php

Holy God, we show forth here
Jesus' death our hearts to clear,
Jesus' life our life to be,
Jesus' love the world to free.
Stay the faithful, win the strayed,
bless the living and the dead,
Father, lead us, 
Savior, feed us,
Spirit, be our store,
now and evermore.

Lord, unite us every one
each to other, through thy Son;
join us truly heart to heart,
let us ne'er be drawn apart:
all one Bread, one Body we,
bound by love to all and thee.
Blessed Master,
bind us faster;
in thy love divine,
love we thee and thine!
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_ghost_with_light_divine.php

Holy Ghost, with light divine,
Shine upon this heart of mine;
Chase the shade of night away,
Turn my darkness into day.

Let me see my Savior’s face,
Let me all His beauties trace;
Show those glorious truths to me
Which are only known to Thee.

Holy Ghost, with power divine,
Cleanse this guilty heart of mine;
Long has sin, without control,
Held dominion o’er my soul.

Holy Ghost, with joy divine,
Cheer this saddened heart of mine;
Bid my many woes depart,
Heal my wounded, bleeding heart.

Holy Spirit, all divine,
Dwell within this heart of mine;
Cast down every idol throne,
Reign supreme, and reign alone.

See, to Thee I yield my heart,
Shed Thy life through every part;
A pure temple I would be,
Wholly dedicate to Thee.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_ghost_come_down_upon_thy_children.php

Refrain

Holy Ghost, come down upon Thy children,
Give us grace and make us Thine;
Thy tender fires within us kindle,
Blessèd Spirit, Dove divine.

For all within us good and holy
Is from Thee, Thy precious gift;
In all our joys, in all our sorrows,
Wistful hearts to Thee we lift.

Refrain

For Thou to us art more than Father,
More than sister, in Thy love,
So gentle, patient, and forbearing,
Holy Spirit, heavenly Dove.

Refrain

O we have grieved Thee, gracious Spirit!
Wayward, wanton, cold are we;
And still our sins, new every morning,
Never yet have wearied Thee.

Refrain

Ah! Sweet Consoler, though we cannot
Love Thee as Thou lovest us,
Yet if Thou deign’st our hearts to kindle
They will not be always thus.

Refrain

With hearts so vile how dare we venture,
King of kings, to love Thee so?
And how canst Thou, with such compassion,
Bear so long with things so low?

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_ghost_dispel_our_sadness.php

Holy Ghost, dispel our sadness;
Pierce the clouds of nature’s night;
Come, great Source of joy and gladness,
Breathe Your life, and spread Your light.
From the height which knows no measure,
As a gracious shower descend,
Bringing down the richest treasure
Man can wish, or God can send.

Author of the new creation,
Come with blessing and with power.
Make our hearts your habitation;
On our souls Your graces shower.
Hear, O hear our supplication,
Blessèd Spirit, God of peace!
Rest upon this congregation,
With the fullness of Your grace.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_holy_ghost_is_my_comforter.php

Holy Ghost, my Comforter,
Now from highest Heaven appear,
Shed Thy gracious radiance here.

Thou the heart’s most precious Guest,
Thou of comforters the best,
Give to us, o’erladen, rest.

Blessèd Sun of grace, o’er all
Faithful hearts who on Thee call
Let Thy light and solace fall.

What without Thy aid is wrought,
Skillful deed or wisest thought,
God will count but vain and naught.

Cleanse us, Lord, from sinful stain,
On the parchèd spirit rain,
Heal the wounded of its pain.

Bend the stubborn will to Thine,
Melt the cold with fire divine,
Erring hearts to right incline.

Grant us, Lord, who cry to Thee,
Steadfast in the faith to be,
Give Thy gift of charity.

May we live in holiness,
And in death find happiness,
And abide with Thee in bliss!


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_god_we_praise_thy_name.php

Holy God, we praise Thy Name;
Lord of all, we bow before Thee!
All on earth Thy scepter claim,
All in Heaven above adore Thee;
Infinite Thy vast domain,
Everlasting is Thy reign.

Hark! the loud celestial hymn
Angel choirs above are raising,
Cherubim and seraphim,
In unceasing chorus praising;
Fill the heavens with sweet accord:
Holy, holy, holy, Lord.

Lo! the apostolic train
Join the sacred Name to hallow;
Prophets swell the loud refrain,
And the white robed martyrs follow;
And from morn to set of sun,
Through the Church the song goes on.

Holy Father, Holy Son,
Holy Spirit, Three we name Thee;
While in essence only One,
Undivided God we claim Thee;
And adoring bend the knee,
While we own the mystery.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_holy_holy.php

Holy, holy, holy
Is the Lord God Almighty
Who was, and is and is to come
Holy, holy, holy
Is the Lord God Almighty
Who was, and is and is to come

Worthy, worthy, worthy
is the Lord God Almighty
Who was, and is and is to come
Worthy, worthy, worthy
is the Lord God Almighty
Who was, and is and is to come

Glory, glory, glory
To the Lord God Almighty
Who was, and is and is to come
Glory, glory, glory
To the Lord God Almighty
Who was, and is and is to come

Glory, glory, glory
To the Lord God Almighty.
Who was, and is and is to come

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_holy_holy.php

Holy, holy, holy
Is the Lord God Almighty
Who was, and is and is to come
Holy, holy, holy
Is the Lord God Almighty
Who was, and is and is to come

Worthy, worthy, worthy
is the Lord God Almighty
Who was, and is and is to come
Worthy, worthy, worthy
is the Lord God Almighty
Who was, and is and is to come

Glory, glory, glory
To the Lord God Almighty
Who was, and is and is to come
Glory, glory, glory
To the Lord God Almighty
Who was, and is and is to come

Glory, glory, glory
To the Lord God Almighty.
Who was, and is and is to come

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_holy_holy_is_the_lord.php

Holy, holy, holy is the Lord!
Sing, O ye people, gladly adore Him;
Let the mountains tremble at His word;
Let the hills be joyful before Him;
Mighty in wisdom, boundless in mercy,
Great is Jehovah, King over all.

Refrain

Holy, holy, holy is the Lord!
Let the hills be joyful before Him.

Praise Him, praise Him! shout aloud for joy,
Watchman of Zion, herald the story;
Sin and death His kingdom shall destroy;
All the earth shall sing of His glory;
Praise Him, ye angels, ye who behold Him,
Robed in His splendor, matchless, divine.

Refrain

King eternal, blessèd be His Name!
So may His children gladly adore Him;
When in Heav’n we join the happy strain,
When we cast our bright crowns before Him;
There in His likeness joyful awaking,
There we shall see Him, there we shall sing:

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_holy_lord_wesley.php

Holy, holy, holy Lord,
God the Father, and the Word,
God the Comforter, receive
Blessings more than we can give!
Mixed with those beyond the sky,
Chanters to the Lord Most High,
We our hearts and voices raise,
Echoing Thy eternal praise.

One, inexplicably Three,
Three, in simplest Unity,
God, incline Thy gracious ear,
Us, Thy lisping creatures, hear!
Thee while man, the earth-born, sings,
Angels shrink within their wings;
Prostrate seraphim above
Breathe unutterable love.

Happy they who never rest,
With Thy heavenly presence blest!
They the heights of glory see,
Sound the depths of Deity.
Fain with them our souls would vie,
Sink as low, and mount as high;
Fall o’erwhelmed with love, or soar,
Shout, or silently adore.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_holy_holy_lord_wordsworth.php

Holy, holy, holy, Lord
God of Hosts, eternal King,
By the heavens and earth adored!
Angels and archangels sing,
Chanting everlastingly
To the blessèd Trinity.

Since by Thee were all things made,
And in Thee do all things live,
Be to Thee all honor paid;
Praise to Thee let all things give;
Singing everlastingly
To the blessèd Trinity.

Thousands, tens of thousands, stand,
Spirits blest, before Thy throne,
Speeding thence at Thy command,
And, when Thy behests are done,
Singing everlastingly
To the blessèd Trinity.

Cherubim and seraphim
Veil their faces with their wings;
Eyes of angels are too dim
To behold the King of kings,
While they sing eternally
To the blessèd Trinity.

Thee apostles, prophets thee,
Thee the noble martyr band,
Praise with solemn jubilee;
Thee, the church in every land;
Singing everlastingly
To the blessèd Trinity.

Hallelujah! Lord, to Thee
Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
Godhead one, and Persons three,
Join we with the heavenly host,
Singing everlastingly
To the blessèd Trinity.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_holy_holy_lord_god_of_hosts.php

Holy, holy, holy Lord
God of Hosts! When Heav’n and earth,
Out of darkness, at Thy Word,
Issued into glorious birth,
All Thy works before Thee stood,
And Thine eye beheld them good,
While they sang with sweet accord,
Holy, holy, holy, Lord!

Holy, holy, holy! Thee
One Jehovah evermore,
Father, Son, and Spirit, we
Dust and ashes, would adore;
Lightly by the world esteemed,
From that world by Thee redeemed,
Sing we here with glad accord,
Holy, holy, holy Lord!

Holy, holy, holy! All
Heaven’s triumphant choirs shall sing
When the ransomed nations fall
At the footstool of their King:
Then shall saints and seraphim,
Hearts and voices, swell one hymn,
Round the throne with full accord,
Holy, holy, holy Lord!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_holy_lord_cullinan.php

Holy, holy, holy Lord
God in Heav’n—on earth adored;
Holy Father, Holy Son,
Holy Spirit, with Them One.
Lord, Creator of all things,
God of prophets, priests and kings:
When th’appointed time had come,
You sent us Your only Son.

Send upon our gifts this day
Blessings from Your throne, we pray.
May Your Spirit be outpoured
At this entrance of the Lord.
Let this bread and wine become
Flesh and Blood of Your dear Son,
That we may united be
With our Lord eternally.

On the night He was betrayed,
As the evening sun did fade,
Our Lord Jesus Christ took bread,
Giving thanks, blessed it and said:
“This, My Body, is for you,
And My Blood—the Cov’nant New.
Eat and drink this sacrament;
My gift is your nourishment."

Jesus Christ, incarnate One,
Son of God and Mary’s son,
We recall Your humble birth:
King of Heav’n and Lord of earth!
We recall Your pain and grief,
Endless anguish, no relief,
When upon that tree You died
For the Church, Your chosen Bride.

But no grave, the Lord, could hold;
Hence the stone away was rolled,
When the resurrected Lord
Rose so that He might award
Victory over death and grave
To those whom He came to save.
Now in heaven He shall reign
’Til we see Him come again.

Send to us Your Spirit, Lord;
By His presence be outpoured
Grace on grace and love on love—
Every blessing from above.
Bless Your Church on earth; preserve
All her leaders as they serve.
Be with all for whom we pray
As we intercede this day.

Our hearts, longing from within,
Ache for freedom from our sin.
In Your mercy, hear our cry
To be with Your saints on high.
God our Father and the Son
And the Spirit, with Them One:
You we honor and adore
With our praises evermore.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_holy_is_what_the_angels_sing.php

There is singing up in Heaven such as we have never known,
Where the angels sing the praises of the Lamb upon the throne,
Their sweet harps are ever tuneful, and their voices always clear,
O that we might be more like them while we serve the Master here!

Refrain

Holy, holy, is what the angels sing,
And I expect to help them make the courts of heaven ring;
But when I sing redemption’s story, they will fold their wings,
For angels never felt the joys that our salvation brings.

But I hear another anthem, blending voices clear and strong,
“Unto Him Who hath redeemed us and hath bought us," is the song;
We have come through tribulation to this land so fair and bright,
In the fountain freely flowing He hath made our garments white.

Refrain

Then the angels stand and listen, for they cannot join the song,
Like the sound of many waters, by that happy, blood washed throng,
For they sing about great trials, battles fought and vict’ries won,
And they praise their great Redeemer, Who hath said to them, “Well done."

Refrain

So, although I’m not an angel, yet I know that over there
I will join a blessèd chorus that the angels cannot share;
I will sing about my Savior, Who upon dark Calvary
Freely pardoned my transgressions, died to set a sinner free.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_jesus_by_thy_passion.php

Holy Jesus, by thy passion,
by the woes which none can share,
borne in more than kingly fashion,
by thy love beyond compare:
Crucified, I turn to thee;
Son of Mary, plead for me.

By the treachery and trial,
by the blows and sore distress,
by desertion and denial,
by thine awful loneliness;
Crucified, I turn to thee;
Son of Mary, plead for me.

By thy look so sweet and lowly,
while they smote thee on the face,
by thy patience, calm and holy,
in the midst of keen disgrace:
Crucified, I turn to thee;
Son of Mary, plead for me.

By the hour of condemnation,
by the blood which trickled down,
when, for us and our salvation:

thou didst wear the robe and crown:
Crucified, I turn to thee;
Son of Mary, plead for me.

By the path of sorrows dreary,
by the cross, thy dreadful load,
by the pain, when, faint and weary,
thou didst sink upon the road:
Crucified, I turn to thee;
Son of Mary, plead for me.

By the spirit which could render
love for hate and good for ill,
by the mercy, sweet and tender,
poured upon thy murderers still:
Crucified, I turn to thee;
Son of Mary, plead for me.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_joseph_holy_father.php

Holy Joseph, dearest father,
To thy children's prayer incline,
Whilst we sing thy joys and sorrows,
And the glories which are thine.

How to praise thee, how to thank thee,
Blessed Saint we can not tell,
Favors countless hast thou given
Can we choose but love thee well?

Holy Joseph, dearest father,
To thy children's prayer incline,
Whilst we sing thy joys and sorrows,
And the glories which are thine.

Near to Jesus, near to Mary,
And kind father, near to thee,
Keep us while on earth we wander,
And in death our helper be.

Holy Joseph, dearest father,
To thy children's prayer incline,
Whilst we sing thy joys and sorrows,
And the glories which are thine.

Sing we Joseph, spouse of Mary,
And our mother's blessed friend,
Favors countless mercies constant,
Thou dost ever to us send.

Holy Joseph, dearest father,
To thy children's prayer incline,
Whilst we sing thy joys and sorrows,
And the glories which are thine.

We have prayed, and thou hast answered;
We have asked and thou hast given
Need we marvel Jesus tells us,
Joseph has the stores of heav'n?

Holy Joseph, dearest father,
To thy children's prayer incline,
Whilst we sing thy joys and sorrows,
And the glories which are thine.

One more favor we will ask thee,
Thou of all canst grant it best,
When we die be thou still near us,
Bring us safe to endless rest.

Holy Joseph, dearest father,
To thy children's prayer incline,
Whilst we sing thy joys and sorrows,
And the glories which are thine.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_lamb_who_thee_confess.php

Holy Lamb, who Thee confess,
Followers of Thy holiness,
Thee they ever keep in view,
Ever ask, “What shall we do?"

Governed by Thy only will,
All Thy words we would fulfill,
Would in all Thy footsteps go,
Walk as Jesus walked below.

While Thou didst on earth appear,
Servant to Thy servants here,
Mindful of Thy place above,
All Thy life was prayer and love.

Such our whole employment be,
Works of faith and charity;
Works of love on man bestowed,
Secret intercourse with God.

Early in the temple met,
Let us still our Savior greet;
Nightly to the mount repair,
Join our praying pattern there.

There by wrestling faith obtain
Power to work for God again,
Power His image to retrieve,
Power, like Thee, our Lord, to live.

Vessels, instruments of grace,
Pass we thus our happy days
’Twixt the mount and multitude,
Doing or receiving good;

Glad to pray and labor on,
Till our earthly course is run,
Till we, on the sacred tree,
Bow the head and die like Thee.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_lamb_who_thee_receive.php

Holy Lamb, who Thee receive,
Who in Thee begin to live,
Day and night they cry to Thee,
As Thou art, so let us be!
Jesu, see my panting breast!
See I pant in Thee to rest!
Gladly would I now be clean,
Cleanse me now from every sin.

Fix, O fix my wavering mind!
To Thy cross my spirit bind;
Earthly passions far remove,
Swallow up my soul in love.
Dust and ashes though we be,
Full of sin and misery,
Thine we are, Thou Son of God!
Take the purchase of Thy blood!

Who in heart on Thee believes,
He the atonement now receives,
He with joy beholds Thy face,
Triumphs in Thy pardoning grace.
See, ye sinners, see the flame,
Rising from the slaughtered Lamb,
Marks the new, the living way,
Leading to eternal day!

Jesus, when this light we see,
All our soul’s athirst for Thee;
When Thy quickening power we prove,
All our heart dissolves in love.
Boundless wisdom, power divine,
Love unspeakable are Thine:
Praise by all to Thee be giv’n,
Sons of earth, and hosts of Heav’n!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_lord.php

Chorus:
Holy, holy Lord
Holy, holy Lord
Holy, holy Lord
Holy, holy
Lord almighty
He's the Lord almighty
He's the Lord almighty
He's the Lord almighty 

Complete and powerful
Faithful and true
Loving and merciful
Perfect and sure 

Repeat Chorus 

Eternal deity (my Lord is holy)
Our King of kings (holy Lord)
Adorned in majesty (my Lord is holy)
Angels will sing 

Repeat Chorus (x2) 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_lord_god_I_love_thy_truth.php

Holy Lord God! I love Thy truth,
Nor dare Thy least commandment slight;
Yet pierced by sin, the serpent’s tooth,
I mourn the anguish of the bite.

But though the poison lurks within,
Hope bids me still with patience wait;
Till death shall set me free from sin,
Free from the only thing I hate.

Had I a throne above the rest,
Where angels and archangels dwell;
One sin, unslain, within my breast,
Would make that Heav’n as dark as hell.

The prisoner, sent to breathe fresh air,
And blessed with liberty again,
Would mourn, were he condemned to wear
One link of all his former chain.

But O! no foe invades the bliss,
When glory crowns the Christian’s head;
One view of Jesus as He is,
Will strike all sin forever dead.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_manna.php

Brethren, we have met to worship and adore the Lord our God;
Will you pray with all your power, while we try to preach the Word?
All is vain unless the Spirit of the Holy One comes down;
Brethren, pray, and holy manna will be showered all around.

Brethren, see poor sinners round you slumbering on the brink of woe;
Death is coming, hell is moving, can you bear to let them go?
See our fathers and our mothers, and our children sinking down;
Brethren, pray and holy manna will be showered all around.

Sisters, will you join and help us? Moses’ sister aided him;
Will you help the trembling mourners who are struggling hard with sin?
Tell them all about the Savior, tell them that He will be found;
Sisters, pray, and holy manna will be showered all around.

Is there a trembling jailer, seeking grace, and filled with tears?
Is there here a weeping Mary, pouring forth a flood of tears?
Brethren, join your cries to help them; sisters, let your prayers abound;
Pray, Oh pray that holy manna may be scattered all around.

Let us love our God supremely, let us love each other, too;
Let us love and pray for sinners, till our God makes all things new.
Then He’ll call us home to Heaven, at His table we’ll sit down;
Christ will gird Himself and serve us with sweet manna all around.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_offerings.php

Holy offerings, rich and rare,
offerings of praise and prayer,
purer life and purpose high,
claspèd hands, uplifted eye,
lowly acts of adoration
to the God of our salvation--
on his altar laid we leave them:
Christ, present them; God receive them.

Promises in sorrow made,
left, alas, too long unpaid;
fervent wishes, earnest thought,
never into action wrought--
long withheld, we now restore them,
on thy holy altar pour them:
there in trembling faith to leave them,
Christ, present them; God receive them.

Homage of each humble heart
ere we from thy house depart;
worship fervent, deep and high,
adoration, ecstasy;
all that childlike love can render
of devotion true and tender--
on thine altar laid we leave them:
Christ, present them; God receive them.

To the Father and the Son
and the Spirit, Three in One,
though our mortal weakness raise
offerings of imperfect praise,
yet with hearts bowed down most lowly,
crying, Holy, holy, holy,
on thine altar laid we leave them:
Christ, present them; God receive them.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_sabbath.php

Holy Sabbath, day of rest;
By our great Redeemer blest;
When in majesty He rose,
More than conqueror o’er His foes.

Refrain

Softly now we hear Him say,
“Turn from earthly toil away;
Let your pray’rs to Heaven ascend;
I will keep you to the end."

Day of worship, hallowed hour,
May the Spirit’s quick’ning pow’r
Give us grace and strength anew,
While our journey we pursue.

Refrain

Holy Sabbath, may thy light,
Pure and holy, calm and bright,
Lift our hearts to God above,
Spring of joy, of life, of love.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_holy_son_of_god_most_high.php

The holy Son of God most high,
For love of Adam’s lapsèd race,
Quit the sweet pleasures of the sky
To bring us to that happy place.

His robes of light He laid aside,
Which did His majesty adorn,
And the frail state of mortals tried,
In human flesh and figure born.

Whole choirs of angels loudly sing
The mystery of His sacred birth,
And the blest news to shepherds bring,
Filling their watchful souls with mirth.

The Son of God thus man became,
That men the sons of God might be,
And by their second birth regain
A likeness to His deity.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_savior_we_adore_thee.php

Holy Savior! we adore Thee,
Seated on the throne of God,
While the heavenly hosts before Thee
Gladly sing Thy praise aloud.
“Thou art worthy!
We are ransomed by Thy blood."

Savior! though the world despised Thee,
Though Thou here wast crucified,
Yet the Father’s glory raised Thee,
Lord of all creation wide;
“Thou art worthy!
We shall live, for Thou hast died."

Haste the day of thy returning
With Thy ransomed church to reign;
Then shall end our days of mourning,
We shall sing with rapture then,
“Thou art worthy!
Come, Lord Jesus, come, Amen."

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_holy_spirit.php

The Spirit, oh, sinner,
In mercy doth move,
Thy heart, so long hardened,
Of sin to reprove;
Resist not the Spirit,
Nor longer delay;
God’s gracious entreaties,
May end with today.

Oh, child of the kingdom,
From sin service cease:
Be filled with the Spirit,
With comfort and peace.
Oh, grieve not the Spirit,
Thy Teacher is He,
That Jesus, Thy Savior,
May glorified be.

Defiled is the temple,
Its beauty laid low,
On God’s holy altar
The embers faint glow.
By love yet rekindled,
A flame may be fanned;
Oh, quench not the Spirit,
The Lord is at hand.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_spirit_dwell_in_me.php

Holy Spirit dwell in me
Touch my eyes that I might see
All your goodness grace and pow'r
Stay beside me ev'ry hour
Be my drink, be my living bread
Keep me sheltered, keep me fed
Holy Spirit, Holy Spirit dwell in me 

Holy Spirit comfort me
Let my heart be one with Thee
When I'm worried soote my mind
Let me sweet contentment find
May I run this wicked race
Filled by your amazing grace
Holy Spirit, Holy Spirit comfort me 

Holy Spirit rescue me
Set my soul completely free
Beside Jordan make my bed
In God's bosom lay my head
Let me live in a brand new place
See my blessed Savior's face
Holy Spirit, Holy Spirit rescue me 

Repeat Verse 1 

Holy Spirit, Holy Spirit dwell in me 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_spirit_gently_come.php

Holy Spirit, gently come,
Raise us from our fallen state,
Fix thy everlasting home
In the hearts thou didst create,
Gift of God most high!
Visit every troubled breast,
Light and life and love supply,
Give our spirits perfect rest.

Heavenly unction from above,
Comforter of hearts that faint,
Fountain, life, and fire of love,
Hear and answer our complaint:
Thee we humbly pray,
Finger of the living God,
Now thy sevenfold gift display,
Shed our Saviour's love abroad.

Now thy quickening influence bring,
On our spirits sweetly move,
Open every mouth to sing
Jesus' everlasting love:
Lighten every heart;
Drive our enemies away,
Joy and peace to us impart,
Lead us in the heavenly way.

Take the things of Christ and show
What our Lord for us hath done;
May we God the Father know
Only in and through the Son:
Nothing will we fear,
Through the wilds and deserts driven,
While we feel thy presence near,
Witnessing our sins forgiven.

Glory be to God alone,
God whose hand created all!
Glory be to God the Son,
Who redeemed us from our fall!
To the Holy Ghost
Equal praise and glory be,
When the course of time is lost,
Lost in wide eternity!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_spirit_lord_of_love.php

Holy Spirit, Lord of love, 

thou who camest from above,
gifts of blessing to bestow 
on your waiting Church below,
once again in love draw near 
to thy servants gathered here.
From their bright baptismal day 
thou hast led them on their way.

When the sacred vow is made, 
when the hands are on them laid,
come in this most solemn hour 
with your strengthening gift of power.
Give them light thy truth to see: 
give them life to live for thee,
daily power to conquer sin,
patient faith, the crown to win.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_spirit_rain_down1.php

Chorus:
Holy Spirit, rain down, rain down
Oh Comforter and Friend
How we need Your touch again
Holy Spirit, rain down, rain down
Let Your power fall, let Your voice be heard
Come and change our hearts as we stand on Your word
Holy Spirit, rain down
Repeat Chorus

Bridge:
No eye has seen, no ear has heard
No mind can know what God has in store
So open up heaven, open it wide
Over Your church, and over our lives

Repeat Bridge

Repeat Chorus

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_spirit_storm_of_love.php

Holy Spirit, storm of love,
break our self-protective walls.
Bring us out and show us why,
nakedly upon the cross,
open to the wind and sky,
Jesus waits and Jesus calls.

Show us, in his tortured flesh,
earth's Creator on display,
broken by affairs of state,
drinking horror, pain and grief,
arching in the winds of hate,
giving love and life away.

Show us how this dying love
entered, bore, and understood
all our deep, unconscious drives,
each exploiting, evil thread
woven through our nations' lives,
all our life apart from God.

Thus convicted, claimed, and called,
freed, as Christ we freely choose,
washed in love, reborn, renamed,
doing justice, knowing God,
may we witness unashamed,
confident to give good news:

News that Jesus is alive,
as his people of the Dove,
going out in praise and prayer,
meet the evils of our time
and the demons of despair
with forgiving, living love.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_spirit_be_my_guide.php

By the promise of the Father,

Comes the Spirit from on high,
Into hearts redeemed from evil,
By His pow’r to sanctify. 

Refrain:
Holy Spirit, faithful Teacher,
In my trusting heart abide;
By Thy sacred, holy presence
Be my Comforter and Guide. 

Reigning there without a rival,
Paradise is now restored;
Perfect peace, abiding pleasure,
Bliss the world cannot afford. 

Pow’r to overcome He gives us,
Pow’r to reign through Jesus’ grace;
Holy boldness in each conflict,
Entrance to that heav’nly place. 

Since the Comforter abideth,
Naught my spirit can molest;
I am sanctified and happy,
Sweet and peaceful is my rest. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_spirit_come_and_shine.php

Holy Spirit, come and shine
Sweetly in this heart of mine,
With Thy heavenly love and light;
Come, Thou Father of the poor,
Come, Thou Giver, great and sure;
Come, and make my spirit bright!

Best of all my helpers, Thou!
Dearest Guest that I can know,
Freshest Draught that I can find:
In my labor Thou art Peace,
Thou dost bid my fever cease,
To my sorrows Thou art kind.

O Thou blessèd Light of Light,
Fill Thou every secret height
In Thy servant’s waiting soul!
Save for this, Thy heavenly aid,
Man would be for nothing made;
Not a sin could he control.

Cleanse Thou every sordid place
Soften harshness by Thy grace,
Heal the wounds I feel within;
Bend the stubborn will to Thine,
Cheer the thoughts that droop and pine—
Rule whatever turns to sin!

Give to them that faithful be
Everlasting trust in Thee,
All Thy sevenfold gifts bestow;
Give to virtue her reward,
Give us safety in our Lord,
Give what joy immortals know!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_spirit_faithful_guide.php

Holy Spirit, faithful Guide, ever near the Christian’s side;
Gently lead us by the hand, pilgrims in a desert land.
Weary souls fore’er rejoice, while they hear that sweetest voice,
Whispering softly, “Wanderer, come, follow Me, I’ll guide thee home."

Ever present, truest Friend, ever near Thine aid to lend,
Leave us not to doubt and fear, groping on in darkness drear.
When the storms are raging sore, hearts grow faint and hopes give o’er.
Whispering softly, “Wanderer, come, follow Me, I’ll guide thee home."

When our days of toil cease, waiting still for sweet release,
Nothing left but heaven and prayer, wondering if our names are there;
Wading deep the dismal flood, pleading naught but Jesus’ blood,
Whispering softly, “Wanderer, come, follow Me, I’ll guide thee home."

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_spirit_from_on_high.php

Holy Spirit, from on high,
Bend o’er us with pitying eye;
Now refresh the drooping heart;
Bid the power of sin depart.

Light up every dark recess
Of our heart’s ungodliness;
Show us every devious way
Where our steps have gone astray.

Teach us, with repentant grief,
Humbly to implore relief;
Then the Savior’s blood reveal,
And our broken spirits heal.

May we daily grow in grace,
And with patience run the race,
Trained in wisdom, led by love,
Till we reach our home above.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_spirit_full_of_love.php

Holy Spirit, fill us now,
While beneath the cross we bow;
Fill us full of peace and love,
Holy Spirit from above. 

Holy Spirit, full of grace,
Show us now the Father’s face,
Brightly shining from on high,
Through a bright and beauteous sky. 

Holy Spirit, full of love,
Coming like a gentle dove,
Come, baptize our hearts anew,
Sweetly, gently, like the dew. 

Holy Spirit, keep us still,
Help us do the Father’s will;
Give us grace and strength each day,
Keep us in the living way. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_spirit_hear_us_mohr.php

Holy Spirit, hear us
On this sacred day;
Come to us with blessing,
Come with us to stay.

Come as once Thou camest
To the faithful few
Patiently awaiting
Jesus’ promise true.

Up to Heav’n ascending,
Our dear Lord has gone;
Yet His little children
Leaves He not alone.

To His blessèd promise
Now in faith we cling.
Comforter, most holy,
Spread o’er us Thy wing.

Lighten Thou our darkness,
Be Thyself our Light;
Strengthen Thou our weakness,
Spirit of all might.

Spirit of Adoption,
Make us overflow
With Thy sevenfold blessing
And in grace to grow.

Into Christ baptizèd
Grant that we may be
Day and night, dear Spirit,
Perfected by Thee!
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_spirit_hear_us_parker.php

Holy Spirit! hear us; help us while we sing;
Breathe into the music of the praise we bring.
Holy Spirit! prompt us when we kneel to pray;
Nearer come and teach us what we ought to say.

Holy Spirit! shine Thou on the Book we read;
Gild its holy pages with the light we need.
Holy Spirit! give us each a lowly mind;
Make us more like Jesus, gentle, pure and kind.

Holy Spirit! brighten little deeds of toil;
And our playful pastimes let no folly spoil.
Holy Spirit! keep us safe from sins which lie
Hidden by some pleasure from our youthful eye.

Holy Spirit! help us daily by Thy might,
What is wrong to conquer and to choose the right.
Holy Spirit! hear us, help us while we sing;
Breathe into the music of the praise we bring.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_spirit_source_of_gladness.php

Holy Spirit, source of gladness,
Come with all Thy radiance bright;
O’er our weariness and sadness
Breathe Thy life and shed Thy light!
Send us Thine illumination,
Banish all our fears at length;
Rest upon this congregation,
Spirit of unfailing strength.

Let that love which knows no measure,
Now in quickening showers descend,
Bringing us the richest treasures
Man can wish or God can send;
Hear our earnest supplication,
Every struggling heart release;
Rest upon this congregation,
Spirit of untroubled peace!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_spirit_truth_divine.php

Holy Spirit, Truth divine,

Dawn upon this soul of mine;
Word of God and inward light
Wake my spirit, clear my sight.

Holy Spirit, Love divine,
Glow within this heart of mine;
Kindle every high desire;
Perish self in Thy pure fire.

Holy Spirit, Power divine
Fill and nerve this will of mine;
Grant that I may strongly live,
Bravely bear, and nobly strive.

Holy Spirit, Right divine,
King within my conscience reign;
Be my Lord, and I shall be
Firmly bound, forever free.

Holy Spirit, Peace divine,
Still this restless heart of mine;
Speak to calm this tossing sea,
Stayed in Thy tranquility.

Holy Spirit, Joy divine,
Gladden Thou this heart of mine;
In the desert ways I sing,
“Spring, O Well, forever spring."

Now incline me to repent,
Let me now my sins lament,
Now my foul revolt deplore,
Weep, believe, and sin no more.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_trinity_of_love.php

Holy Trinity of Love,
perfect peace that has no end;
you are our eternal hope:
maker, guide and human friend.

Through earth's devastating storms,
thunderclouds that hide your face,
still, Creator God, you hold
chaos in the grip of grace.

Through earth's troubles and alarms,
more than ocean's countless waves,
Christ, command our fears, "Be still;"
give the peace our spirit craves.

Holy Spirit, when life's storms
overwhelm us, and we drown;
lifted by your peace and power,
we still tread the chaos down.

Holy, holy, holy God,
pain and death, the throes of hell,
cannot conquer! Even now,
we believe, all shall be well.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_and_true_and_righteous_lord.php

Written by Charles Wesley
Holy, and true, and righteous Lord,
I wait to prove Thy perfect will,
Be mindful of Thy gracious Word,
And stamp me with Thy Spirit’s seal. 

Open my faith’s interior eye,
Display Thy glory from above;
And all I am shall sink and die,
Lost in astonishment and love.

Confound, o’erpower me by Thy grace,
I would be by myself abhorred;
All might, all majesty, all praise,
All glory, be to Christ my Lord.

Now let me gain perfection’s height,
Now let me into nothing fall;
Be less than nothing in Thy sight,
And feel that Christ is all in all!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_fire.php

Holy fire from heaven, descend on us we pray, let us burn again
Holy fire from heaven, consume our hearts today, let us burn again
Let us burn again
Holy breath from heaven, descend on us we pray, let us breathe again
Holy breath from heaven, revive our hearts today, let us breathe again

Waiting in expectancy
Surrendered to your sovereignty
We're hungry for true intimacy, Lord
For the things of your heart

Holy stream from heaven, descend to us we pray, let us drink again
Holy stream from heaven, bring new life today, let us drink again
Let us drink again

© 1998 Vineyard Songs (UK, Eire)
CCLI #1596342
Album: Come, Now Is The Time To Worship

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_is_the_lord_my_god.php

Every heart by silent
For the Lord is near
He is to be honored
The Lord is to be feared

Holy is the Lord
Holy is the Lord my
Holy is the Lord my God
Holy is the Lord
Holy is the Lord my
Holy is the Lord my God

Captured by your presence
I've no words to speak
Undone by your glory
My impurity I see

We cry Holy, We cry Holy, We cry Holy is the Lord

© 2002 Vineyard Song (Canada)
CCLI #1596342
Album: Free to Fly/Vineyard 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_love.php

Many waters cannot quench your love, rivers cannot overwhelm it
Oceans of fear cannot conceal your love for me
(Repeat)
Your love for me

Holy love, flow in me, fill me up like the deepest sea
Like a crashing wave pouring over me
Holy love flow in me

Many sorrows cannot quench your love, darkness cannot overwhelm it
I will not fear, your love is here to comfort me
(Repeat)
You comfort me

When I find you I find healing
When I find you I find peace
And I know that there's no river so wide
No mountain so high, no ocean so deep
That you can't part the sea

© 1995 Mercy/Vineyard Publishing
CCLI #1596342
Album: The River Is Here
25 Top Vineyard Worship Songs

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_spirit_come.php

Holy Spirit, come
Holy Spirit, dwell
Fill Your church with joy overflowing
And peace overflowing
And love overflowing
In all of Your glory come (repeat)

Fill Your church with joy overflowing
And peace overflowing
And love overflowing
In all of Your glory come

© 1999 Sovereign Productions
CCLI# 1596342
Album: Live from the Strip 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/holy_spirit_lead_us_now.php

Holy Spirit, lead us now
Boldly to the throne of grace;
While our heads in prayer we bow,
Let Thy presence fill this place;
Holy Spirit, Heav'nly Guide,
Lead us to the Crucified!

This is now our time of need,
This is now the day of grace;
Now our souls with manna feed,
Ere we leave this sacred place:
Holy Spirit, Heav'nly Dove,
Lead us to the feast of love!

At the blessed mercy seat,
Peace and joy are freely giv'n;
While we wait at Jesus' feet,
Make this place the gate of heav'n;
Holy Spirit, Heav'nly Friend,
Now upon our hearts descend!

Weak and sinful though we be,
Jesus' blood can cleanse from sin;
At the Fountain full and free,
Wash and make us pure within:
Holy Spirit, Cleansing Fire,
Burn up ev'ry base desire 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/home.php



Oh, home of my soul
In that far away goal,
Each day brings me nearer to thee;
The great throne so white,
And my crown shining bright,
Mine eyes ever longing to see. 

A musical strain
From that far distant plain
Now sweeps gently over my soul;
And waves of sweet peace
In my heart shall increase,
While years of eternity roll. 

The day will soon come
When we’ll all gather home,
As pilgrims no more we shall roam;
Ah, whom shall we see?
And what joy will it be
To meet with the dear ones at home!


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/home_at_last.php



Cheer, O cheer, ye sons of Zion!
Weary days will soon be past;
Joy’s bright banner waving o’er us
Tells that Heav’n is won at last.
On that fair, celestial morning,
Comes no cloud of grief or pain;
In your peaceful tents abiding,
Sorrow ne’er shall come again.

Refrain

Cheer, O cheer, ye sons of Zion!
Weary days will soon be past;
Joy’s bright banner waving o’er us
Tells that Heav’n is won at last.

Cheer, O cheer, the morn is breaking!
Gloomy night will disappear;
Christ will come with sweet awaking;
Happier days will soon be here;
Long the pilgrim path we’ve wandered,
Long we’ve hoped ’mid doubt and fear,
Hard we’ve pressed thro’ many a battle—
Now the day of peace is here.

Refrain

Cheer, O cheer, the morn is breaking!
Bright its beams of promise rise;
Sing, O sing, ye heirs of Zion!
Hear the welcome from the skies:
“Come, ye blessèd of My Father,"
Faint no more ’mid doubts and fears;
Heaven’s bright portal opes before you;
Wait for you immortal years.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/home_inside_of_me.php



You live on the highest mountains
You swim in the deepest sea
You dwell in the grandest canyon (canyon, canyon)
Yet You make Your home inside of me
Yes You make Your home inside of me
You call to the leaves in springtime
And you speak to the kings of men
You breathe life, life into a baby
Yet You make Your home inside of me
Yes You make Your home inside of me

Chorus 1:
Home inside of me
Home inside of me
Of all the places You could be
You choose to make Your home (home inside of me)
Inside of me

You walk through the starry heavens
You run to the soul that seeks
You climb the hill of sorrow
Yet You make Your home inside of me
Yes You make Your home inside of me

Repeat Chorus 1

Chorus 2:
Home inside of me (inside of me)
Home inside of me
Of all the places You could be (places you could be)
You choose to make Your home (home inside of me)
Inside of me

Repeat Chorus 2

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/home_of_the_soul.php

I will sing you a song of that beautiful land,
The far away home of the soul,
Where no storms ever beat on the glittering strand,
While the years of eternity roll,
While the years of eternity roll;
Where no storms ever beat on the glittering strand,
While the years of eternity roll.

Oh, that home of the soul! In my visions and dreams
Its bright, jasper walls I can see;
Till I fancy but thinly the veil intervenes
Between the fair city and me,
Between the fair city and me;
Till I fancy but thinly the veil intervenes
Between the fair city and me.

That unchangeable home is for you and for me,
Where Jesus of Nazareth stands;
The King of all kingdoms forever is He,
And He holdeth our crowns in His hands,
And He holdeth our crowns in His hands;
The King of all kingdoms forever is He,
And He holdeth our crowns in His hands.

Oh, how sweet it will be in that beautiful land,
So free from all sorrow and pain,
With songs on our lips and our harps in our hands,
To meet one another again,
To meet one another again;
With songs on our lips and our harps in our hands,
To meet one another again.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/home_run.php

Spoken Vocal:
"I hope you're ready for a great afternoon of baseball here at Clifty Stadium 
because these guys are hungry for a victory today. Looking for that sweet 
deliverance. Are you ready? Play ball!" 
The lights go on, another game day
I grabbed my bat and headed for the plate
But the first pitch was a curve, and I was done
"STRIKE ONE!"
I stepped out of the box, looked the pitcher in the eye
You could read his lips, he said, "Punk you're mine!"
So I gave him a wink and said, "Let's see what you can do"
"STRIKE TWO!" 

Chorus:
Got to keep my eye on the ball
Swing straight and true and follow through
Don't be afraid whatever the call
Because we're never alone, our coach is there to cheer us on
Well it's the wind up (batter up, batter up), here comes the ball (batter up, 
batter up)
You got to pray and swing, watch it till it's going, going, it's gone
Oh, oh, oh home run
Oh, oh, oh home run 

You know life can be like a baseball game
We're on the same team but we're not all the same
That's why we've got to learn to play together
I didn't join this team to sit on the bench
I'm going deep swinging for the fence
I've got some friends on base I've got to get home 

Repeat Chorus 

We are not the first to play this game or stand over this plate
We are surrounded by the legacy like they're sitting in the stands
I can see them waving their hands
Go, go all the way 

Spoken Vocal:
"It's going, it's going, it's going, home run. It is outta here. That baby's 
gone." 

Oh, oh, oh home run (we need a home run)
Oh, oh, oh home run (we need a home run)
Oh, oh, oh home run (get back, get back, oh it's gone - forget about that one)
Oh, oh, oh home run (aloha means goodbye)
Oh, oh, oh home run (I don't know what that pitch was, but it tastes like 
chicken) 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/home_where_i_belong1.php

Goin' home, where I belong 
They say that Heaven's pretty
Living here is too
But if they said that I would have to choose between the two
I'd go home, goin' home (going home)
Where I belong (I belong) 

Sometimes when I'm dreamin' (sometimes dreamin')
It comes as no surprise (no surprise)
But if you look you'll see the homesick feelin' in my eyes
I'm goin' home (goin' home), yes I am goin' home (goin' home)
Where I belong (I be..., I belong) 

Chorus:
While I'm here I'll serve Him gladly
And sing him all these songs
I'm here, but not for long (not for long) 

When I'm feelin' lonely (feeling lonely)
And when I'm feelin' blue (feeling blue)
It's such a joy to know that I'm only passin' through
I'm headed home (goin' home), goin' home (goin' home)
Where I belong (I belong) 

Repeat Chorus 

One day I'll be sleepin' (I'll be sleepin')
When death knocks on my door (on my door)
And I'll awake to find that I'm not homesick anymore
Cause I'll be home (goin' home), I'll be home (goin' home)
Where I belong (home where I belong) 

This is where I belong


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/homecoming_day.php

Don稚 cry for me when you see that I知 missing
I知 finally on my way home
My blessed Lord will be waiting to greet me
From his arms I値l never roam

Chorus:
Yes I will rise and join all the saints gone on before
I値l sing up there and praise Him for aye
The greatest joy with be Jesus to love and adore
Yes it will be a great homecoming day

I値l take my flight to that gloryland city
I値l sing and shout evermore
Homecoming day will be worth all the waiting
I am ready now to soar

Repeat Chorus (x2)

The greatest joy with be Jesus to love and adore
Yes it will be a great homecoming day

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/homegoing.php

When you hear of my home going... Don't worry about me. 
When you hear of my home going... Don't worry about me. 
When you hear of my home going... Don't worry about me. 
I'M PACKED RIGHT NOW, HEY, HEY, ON MY WAY HOME. 

One thing I know... Sure been born again. 
I'VE MADE MY PREPARATIONS, ONE FRIDAY, LORD YOU SURE KNOW WHEN 
YOU CALLED, BE MY TIME TO GO. 
Hey... I'm just another soldier, going home to be with the Lord. 

OH, GOING HOME GOING HOME 
GOING HOME GOING HOME 
I'M GOING HOME GOING HOME 
I'M GOING HOME YES I'M GOING HOME 
ONE OF THESE DAYS GOING HOME 
WON'T BE LONG GOING HOME 
YOU'LL LOOK FOR ME GOING HOME 
I'LL BE GONE YES I'M GOING HOME 
GOING HOME GOING HOME 
I'M GOING HOME GOING HOME 
I'M GOING HOME GOING HOME 
I'M GOING HOME YES I'M GOING HOME 
I'M JUST ANOTHER SOLDIER,

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/homeward_bound.php

Out on an ocean all boundless we ride,
We’re homeward bound, homeward bound;
Tossed on the waves of a rough, restless tide,
We’re homeward bound, homeward bound;
Far from the safe, quiet harbor we rode,
Seeking our Father’s celestial abode;
Promise of which on us each He bestowed:
We’re homeward bound, homeward bound.

Wildly the storm sweeps us on as it roars,
We’re homeward bound, homeward bound;
Look! yonder lie the bright heavenly shores:
We’re homeward bound, homeward bound;
Steady, O pilot! stand firm at the wheel;
Steady! we soon shall outweather the gale;
Oh, how we fly ’neath the loud creaking sail!
We’re homeward bound, homeward bound.

Into the harbor of Heav’n now we glide;
We’re home at last, home at last;
Softly we drift on its bright silver tide;
We’re home at last, home at last;
Glory to God! all our dangers are o’er;
We stand secure on the glorified shore;
Glory to God! we will shout evermore:
We’re home at last, home at last;

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/honor_and_glory_thanksgiving_and_praise.php

Honor and glory, thanksgiving and praise,
Maker of all things, to Thee we upraise;
God the Almighty, the Father, the Lord;
God by the angels obeyed and adored.

Thou art the Father of heaven and earth;
Worlds uncreated to Thee owe their birth;
All the creation, Thy voice when it heard,
Started to life and to light at Thy Word.

Ocean the restless, and waters that swell,
Lightnings that flash over flood, over fell,
Own Thee the Master Almighty, and call
Thee the Creator, the Father, of all.

Yea, Thou art Father of all, and Thy love
Pity for man that is fallen doth move;
Guide us in life, and protect to the last;
And, at Thine Advent, Lord, pardon the past.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/honey_in_the_rock.php

O my brother, do you know the Savior,
Who is wondrous kind and true?
He’s the “Rock of your salvation!"
There’s Honey in the Rock for you.

Refrain

Oh, there’s Honey in the Rock, my brother,
There’s Honey in the Rock for you;
Leave your sins for the blood to cover,
There’s Honey in the Rock for you.

Have you “tasted that the Lord is gracious,"
Do you walk in the way that’s new?
Have you drunk from the living Fountain?
There’s Honey in the Rock for you.

Refrain

Do you pray unto God the Father,
“What wilt Thou have me to do?"
Never fear, He will surely answer,
There’s Honey in the Rock for you.

Refrain

Then go out through the streets and byways,
Preach the Word to the many or few;
Say to every fallen brother,
There’s Honey in the Rock for you.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hope.php

Have we any hope within us of a life beyond the grave,
In the sweet and vernal lands?
Do we know if this, our tabernacle, were to be dissolved,
We’ve a house not made with hands? 

Refrain:
We have a hope within our souls,
Brighter than the perfect day:
God has given us His Spirit,
And we want the world to hear it,
All the doubts are passed away. 

Blessed hope we have within us is an anchor to the soul,
It is both steadfast and sure;
It is founded on the promises of Father’s written word,
And ’twill evermore endure. 

Hope has brought us through the dangers and temptations of the past,
And we fear not those to come;
By her blessings we’ll go forward, while our mortal life shall last,
Then we’ll joyously go home. 

Since we’ve walked the strait and narrow way our path has ever shone
Brighter, brighter, day by day;
Hope within our hearts assures us it is better farther on,
It is brighter all the way. 

Life will end in joyful singing, “I have fought a faithful fight,"
Then we’ll lay our armor down;
And our soul will break the cable here, and take its happy flight,
To possess a starry crown. 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_beautiful_heaven_must_be.php

We read of a place that’s called heaven,
It’s made for the pure and the free;
These truths in God’s Word He hath given,
How beautiful heaven must be. 

Refrain:
How beautiful heaven must be,
Sweet home of the happy and free;
Fair heaven of rest for the weary,
How beautiful heaven must be. 

In heaven no drooping nor pining,
No wishing for elsewhere to be;
God’s light is forever there shining,
How beautiful heaven must be. 

Pure waters of life there are flowing,
And all who will drink may be free;
Rare jewels of splendor are glowing,
How beautiful heaven must be. 

The angels so sweetly are singing,
Up there by the beautiful sea;
Sweet chords from their gold harps are ringing,
How beautiful heaven must be. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hope_of_the_righteous.php

Beyond this world of toil and care,
Beyond this veil of gloom;
There is a land, a happy land,
A place we call our home. 

Refrain:
Oh, yes, we値l trust Him while we live!
We値l trust Him when we die;
And then when all our work is done,
We値l reign with Him on high. 

Oh, what a blessed hope is this,
An anchor to the soul;
And if we do our Savior痴 will,
We値l safely reach the goal. 

God says, 添e must be born again";
To us this truth is giv地;
And if we do not His commands,
We shall not enter heav地. 

To enter heav地 we must be pure
And holy in His sight;
And every day we surely must
Be walking in the light. 

We値l pray for God to keep our feet
Upon the Corner Stone;
We値l give our hearts and lives to Him,
For we are not our own.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_sweet_is_my_rest.php

How sweet is the comfort and rest of my soul,
Where peace doth so tranquilly flow;
Though storm-cloud and tempest and dark billows roll,
All my heart with His sunlight doth glow. 

Refrain:
How sweet is my rest! And how richly I’m blest!
Oh, how sweet is the rest of my soul! 

No fears shall alarm me though Satan be nigh,
He’s subject to Jesus’ control;
Though tempted and tried, Christ regardeth my cry,
Truly He is the joy of my soul. 

My sins all are gone, oh, what rapture to know
They’re nailed to the cross where He died;
The blood doth atone and my heart doth o’erflow,
Praise the Lord for the soul-cleansing tide! 

I’m saved even now, and though death soon may come,
No harm shall it bring to my soul;
For all it can do is to carry me home,
To be safe while the ages shall roll.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_sweet_is_my_walk_with_jesus.php

How sweet is my walk with Jesus!
What blessings He breathes on me!
We walk in the golden morning—
And, oh, how my soul is free!—
And onward together journey,
As swiftly the moments fly;
I sing of His love at evening,
As twilight illumes the sky. 

Refrain:
Oh, sweet is my walk with Jesus!
How gently He smiles on me!
Yet, nearer, my Lord so precious,
Oh, help me to walk with Thee. 

How sweet is my walk with Jesus!
His whispers of peace I hear;
His banner of love is o’er us,
And angels are hov’ring near;
I walk in the light with Jesus,
He shines in the narrow way;
The shadows of sin are vanished,
I walk in the light of day. 

How sweet is my walk with Jesus!
I love all the way He trod;
Embraced in His sweet communion,
I’ll walk with the Son of God;
I turn from the paths of pleasure,
And closer to Jesus press;
I’ll walk with my dear Redeemer,
In His perfect holiness. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hope_of_the_nations.php

Jesus, hope of the nations
Jesus, comfort for all who mourn
You are the source of heaven's hope on earth

Jesus, light in the darkness
Jesus, truth in each circumstance
You are the source of heaven's light on earth

In history, You lived and died,
You broke the chains, You rose to life

You are the hope, living in us
You are the Rock, in whom we trust
You are the light, shining for all the world to see

You rose from the dead, conquering fear
Our Prince of Peace, drawing us near
Jesus our hope, living for all who will receive
Lord we believe! (Lord we believe Lord we believe)

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hosanna_its_jesus.php

Hosanna, hosanna,
blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord
Hosanna, hosanna,
blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord

Son of David, the King of Israel
Our Salvation, it's Jesus! Jesus !! (chorus)

Peace in heaven and glory to the earth
Hosanna in the highest. Jesus ! (chorus)

Rejoice greatly, behold your King has come
Shout in vict'ry it's Jesus ! Jesus !! (chorus, key of A)

Hosanna, hosanna,
blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord
Hosanna, hosanna,
blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord

Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hosanna_in_the_highest.php

Hosanna in the highest
To our exalted Savior,
Who left behind for all mankind
These tokens of His favor:
His bleeding love and mercy,
His all redeeming Passion;
Who here displays, and gives the grace
Which brings us our salvation.

Louder than gathered waters,
Or bursting peals of thunder,
We lift our voice and speak our joys
And shout our loving wonder.
Shout, all our elder brethren,
While we record the story
Of Him that came and suffered shame,
To carry us to glory.

Angels in fixed amazement
Around our altars hover,
With eager gaze adore the grace
Of our eternal Lover:
Himself and all His fullness
Who gives to the believer;
And by this bread whoe’er are fed
Shall live with God for ever.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hosanna_jesus_reigns.php

Hosanna! Jesus reigns!
All pow'r is in his hand; The trumpet of his gospel sounds
Salvation through our land.

The King of kings he is--
His honors spread abroad
The Lord of lords; and he should be
By heav'n and earth adored.

Let old and young combine
To sing his lofty praise;
The heav'nly hosts and saints on earth
Their sweetest anthems raise.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hosanna_to_the_living_lord.php



Hosanna to the living Lord!
Hosanna to the th’Incarnate Word!
To Christ, Creator, Savior, King,
Let earth, let heaven, Hosanna ring!

Refrain

Hosanna, Lord!
Hosanna in the highest!

“Hosanna, Lord!" Thine angels cry;
“Hosanna, Lord!" Thy saints reply;
Above, beneath us, and around,
The dead and living swell the sound:

Refrain

O Savior, with protecting care,
Return to this Thy house of prayer;
Assembled in Thy sacred Name,
Now we Thy parting promise claim:

Refrain

But chiefest, in our cleansèd breast,
Eternal, bid Thy Spirit rest,
And make our secret soul to be
A temple pure, and worthy Thee.

Refrain

So in the last and dreadful day,
When earth and heaven shall melt away,
Thy flock, redeemed from sinful stain,
Shall swell the sound of praise again.
Hosanna, Lord! Hosanna in the highest!

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hosanna_to_the_prince_of_light.php




1. Hosanna to the Prince of Light 
That clothes himself in clay,
Entered the iron gates of death,
And tore the bars away.

2. Death is no more the king of dread,
Since our Immanuel rose;
He took the tyrant's sting away,
And spoiled our hellish foes.

3. See how the Conqueror mounts aloft,
And to His Father flies.
With scars of honor in His flesh,
And triumph in His eyes.

4. Raise your devotion, mortal tongues,
To reach His blest abode;
Sweet be the accents of your songs
To our incarnate God.

5. Bright angels, strike your loudest strings
Your sweetest voices raise;
Let heav'n and all created things
Sound our Immanuel's praise.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hosanna_we_sing.php

Hosanna we sing, like the children dear,
In the olden days when the Lord lived here;
He blessed little children, and smiled on them,
While they chanted His praise in Jerusalem.

Alleluia we sing, like the children bright,
With their harps of gold and their raiment white,
As they follow their Shepherd with loving eyes,
Through the beautiful valleys of Paradise.

Hosanna we sing, for He bends His ear,
And rejoices the hymns of His own to hear;
We know that His heart will never wax cold
To the lambs that He feeds in His earthly fold.

Alleluia we sing in the Church we love,
Alleluia resounds in the Church above,
To Thy little ones, Lord, may such grace be given,
That we lose not our part in the song of Heav’n.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hosanna_loud_hosanna.php

Hosanna, loud hosanna, the little children sang;
Through pillared court and temple the lovely anthem rang.
To Jesus, Who had blessed them close folded to His breast,
The children sang their praises, the simplest and the best.

From Olivet they followed mid an exultant crowd,
The victor palm branch waving, and chanting clear and loud.
The Lord of men and angels rode on in lowly state,
Nor scorned that little children should on His bidding wait.

“Hosanna in the highest!" that ancient song we sing,
For Christ is our Redeemer, the Lord of heaven our King.
O may we ever praise Him with heart and life and voice,
And in His blissful presence eternally rejoice!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hour_by_hour.php

Hour by hour we trust in Jesus,
Hour by hour for strength we pray;
Hour by hour the sands are dropping
From the glass of time away.

Refrain

We are going home where the pure and blest
In perfect peace with Jesus free from care shall rest;
Then let us go on with a happy, happy song,
Then let us go on with a happy, happy song;
O soon we’ll rest on yonder shore,
Rest forevermore.

Hour by hour we hear a warning
From the spirit-voice within;
Hour by hour we meet the tempter,
Hour by hour we fall or win.

Refrain

Hour by hour we journey onward,
Hour by hour we stem the tide;
Hour by hour we miss the dear ones,
Anchored on the other side.

Refrain

Hour by hour the heart grows fainter,
Hour by hour the sunlight dies;
Hour by hour we near the portals
Of our home beyond the skies.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/house_of_praise.php

House of Praise, House of Praise
There is a path before us
And it's there that we must choose
For the road that leads to life is what we're after
Within the pounding chorus
We hear the words of truth
For the knowledge of Him brings the joy and laughter
Dwelling in the presence of His majesty
Is liberty, I'm free to sing
That is where my soul will always long to be
Even when it seems I can't go on

Chorus:
The Lord, He has given me the power
(And He's) with me every hour
And made my heart His dwelling place
And Lord, we thank You for Your Son
And all the battles won
That brought me to Your house of praise

House of Praise

He will always answer you
When you kneel to pray
God has made it plain that He is the giver
It may not be in my time
But I know He'll make a way
Cause I'm living in the light of One who delivers

(Oh, yes I'm) Reaching down from heaven
He took hold of me
So carefully He rescued me (oh, He rescued me)
No one here has yet encountered Calvary
(Oh, and) That is why in faith I'm pressin' on

Repeat Chorus

We magnify Your name most high
We look to You for your are life
We endlessly adore Your name
For You will always be the same
You are the Lord of lords
And King of kings
We praise Your name in everything
We long to see You in the sky
We love You, lift You on high

Repeat Chorus (x2)

Bringing me to your house of Praise (repeat and fade)

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/house_on_the_rock.php

Why do you call me Lord? (Lord)
Don't do what I say (say)
Listen to the wise man (wise)
And heed his ways (ways)
And if you stop for a moment I'll show you (stop for a moment I'll show you)
How wonderful life can be (wondeful)
If like the wise man you faithfully follow (wise man you faithfully follow)
All the words that you've heard from Me (I will follow)
And when the storms came down the footings he'd laid
Prevented the ruin of the house he'd made 

Chorus:
And the storm (it couldn't shake it)
And the winds (they couldn't break it)
And the streams (they) couldn't take it away
And the rock (is standin' tall)
And the house (will never fall)
And the storm will never take it away
No, the storm will never take it away 

Why do you call me Lord?
And don't do what I say
Castles in the sand will simply float away
(Many have heard) Many have heard My words now
(Many close their eyes) And many have closed their eyes
(No foundation) With no true foundation
(Comes as no surprise) It comes as no surprise
And when the storm came down and collapsed those walls
It ruined the house with a mighty great fall 

Repeat Chorus 

(Never take it away) 

Bridge:
The wise man built his house on solid ground (on the rock)
And his house stood strong when the storm came down (down) 

Repeat Chorus (x2) 

No, the storm will never take it away 

Why do you call me Lord?

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hover_oer_me_holy_spirit.php

Hover o’er me, Holy Spirit,
Bathe my trembling heart and brow;
Fill me with Thy hallowed presence,
Come, O come and fill me now.

Refrain

Fill me now, fill me now,
Jesus, come and fill me now;
Fill me with Thy hallowed presence,
Come, O come, and fill me now.

Thou canst fill me, gracious Spirit,
Though I cannot tell Thee how;
But I need Thee, greatly need Thee,
Come, O come and fill me now.

Refrain

I am weakness, full of weakness,
At Thy sacred feet I bow;
Blest, divine, eternal Spirit,
Fill with power and fill me now.

Refrain

Cleanse and comfort, bless and save me,
Bathe, O bathe my heart and brow;
Thou art comforting and saving,
Thou art sweetly filling now.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_about_your_heart.php

Chorus:
How about your heart, is it right with God?
That's the thing that counts today
Is it black by sin, is it pure within?
Could you ask Christ in to stay?

People often see you as you are outside
Jesus really knows you for He sees inside

How about your heart, is it right with God?
That's the thing that counts today

People often see you as you are outside
Jesus really knows you for He sees inside

How about your heart, is it right with God?
That's the thing that counts today

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_are_they_servants_blest_o_lord.php

How are Thy servants blest, O Lord!
How sure is their defense!
Eternal wisdom is their guide,
Their help Omnipotence.

In foreign realms, and lands remote,
Supported by Thy care,
Through burning climes they pass unhurt,
And breathe in tainted air.

When by the dreadful tempest borne
High on the broken wave,
They know Thou art not slow to her,
Nor impotent to save.

The storm is laid, the winds retire,
Obedient to Thy will,
The sea, that roars at Thy command,
At Thy command is still.

From all our griefs and fears, O Lord,
Thy mercy sets us free;
While in the confidence of prayer
Our hearts take hold on Thee.

In midst of dangers, fears and death,
Thy goodness we adore;
We praise Thee for Thy mercies past,
And humbly hope for more

Our life, while Thou preservest life,
A sacrifice shall be;
And death, when death shall be our lot,
Shall join our souls to Thee.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_awesome_is_this_place.php

I see angels ascending, descending
on a stairway from heaven to earth.
At the top stands the Lord, God of Abr’ham.
He is mighty.

How awesome is this place, dear Father.
How beautiful the house of God.
You're present at the gate of heaven,
it is good to be near. It is good to be here.
How awesome is this place, oh Lord

I feel blessings ascending, descending
on the hearts and the prayers of the saints.
Through this fellowship, sweet, comes His pleasure.
He is lovely ! (chorus)

To the Ancient of Days be the honor.
He is worthy alone to be praised.
We will sing through the ages in Glory
" You are holy !! " (chorus 2x)

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_awesome_is_this_this_place.php

HOW AWESOME IS THIS PLACE © 2001, Ralph Merrifield, New Hope Music, PO Box 1612, 
Westboro, MA 01581. Duplication allowed and encouraged for all free 
distribution.

I see angels ascending, descending on a stairway from heaven to earth.
At the top stands the Lord, God of Abr’ham. He is mighty.

Refrain

How awesome is this place, dear Father,
How beautiful the house of God.
Your Presence at the gate of heaven, it is good to be near.
It is good to be here.
How awesome is this place, oh Lord.

I feel blessings ascending, descending on the hearts and the pray’rs of the 
saints
Through this fellowship, sweet, comes His pleasure. He is lovely!

Refrain

To the Ancient of Days be the honor. He is worthy alone to be praised.
We will sing through the ages in Glory “You are Holy!!"

Refrain

HOW AWESOME IS THIS PLACE © 2001, Ralph Merrifield, New Hope Music, PO Box 1612, 
Westboro, MA 01581. Duplication allowed and encouraged for all free 
distribution.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_beauteous_are_their_feet.php

How beauteous are their feet
Who stand on Zion’s hill!
Who bring salvation on their tongues,
And words of peace reveal!

How charming is their voice!
How sweet the tidings are!
“Zion, behold thy Savior King;
He reigns and triumphs here."

How happy are our ears
That hear this joyful sound,
Which kings and prophets waited for,
And sought, but never found!

How blessèd are our eyes
That see this heav’nly light
Prophets and kings desired it long,
But died without the sight.

The watchmen join their voice,
And tuneful notes employ;
Jerusalem breaks forth in songs,
And deserts learn the joy.

The Lord makes bare His arm
Through all the earth abroad;
Let every nation now behold
Their Savior and their God!
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_beautiful_the_mystery.php

HOW BEAUTIFUL THE MYSTERY © 2000 Eric Schu­mach­er. Per­miss­ion grant­ed to 
re­pro­duce un­al­tered text in non­sal­a­ble, tem­po­ra­ry wor­ship me­dia. All 
other us­es re­quire the per­miss­ion of the au­thor.

How beautiful the mystery:
Th’eternal Word comes down
To live and love and die and rise,
To claim His victor’s crown.

Content we find Him cradled there
Amongst the filth and beasts.
Who would believe that He will be
Our guide from death to peace!

By angry swords and dark decree
He’s driven from His land.
But still He humbly bows His head
To trust His Father’s hand.

The spotless Lamb lays down His life,
A curse upon a cross.
Then lives that He might guarantee
That no sheep will be lost.

O! May our hearts grow ever fond
Of Mary’s precious boy:
Our Christ, our hope, our heart’s desire,
Our King and Sov’reign Joy!
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_beauteous_were_the_marks_divine.php

How beauteous were the marks divine,
That in Thy meekness used to shine;
That lit Thy lonely pathway, trod
In wondrous love, O Lamb of God!

Oh! who like Thee, so calm, so bright;
So pure, so made to live in light?
Oh, who like Thee did ever go
So patient through a world of woe?

Oh, who like Thee so humbly bore
The scorn, the scoffs of men, before?
So meek, forgiving, godlike, high,
So glorious in humility?

And all Thy life’s unchanging years,
A man of sorrows and of tears,
The cross, where all our sins were laid,
Upon Thy bending shoulders weighed.

E’en death, which sets the prisoner free,
Was pain, and scoff, and scorn to Thee;
Yet love through all Thy torture glowed,
And mercy with Thy lifeblood flowed.

Oh, in Thy light be mine to go,
Illumining all my way of woe!
And give me ever on the road
To trace Thy footsteps, Son of God!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_beautiful_heaven_must_be.php

We read of a place that’s called heaven,
It’s made for the pure and the free;
These truths in God’s Word He hath given,
How beautiful heaven must be. 

Refrain:
How beautiful heaven must be,
Sweet home of the happy and free;
Fair heaven of rest for the weary,
How beautiful heaven must be. 

In heaven no drooping nor pining,
No wishing for elsewhere to be;
God’s light is forever there shining,
How beautiful heaven must be. 

Pure waters of life there are flowing,
And all who will drink may be free;
Rare jewels of splendor are glowing,
How beautiful heaven must be. 

The angels so sweetly are singing,
Up there by the beautiful sea;
Sweet chords from their gold harps are ringing,
How beautiful heaven must be. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_beautiful_the_mystery.php

HOW BEAUTIFUL THE MYSTERY © 2000 Eric Schu­mach­er. Per­miss­ion grant­ed to 
re­pro­duce un­al­tered text in non­sal­a­ble, tem­po­ra­ry wor­ship me­dia. All 
other us­es re­quire the per­miss­ion of the au­thor.

How beautiful the mystery:
Th’eternal Word comes down
To live and love and die and rise,
To claim His victor’s crown.

Content we find Him cradled there
Amongst the filth and beasts.
Who would believe that He will be
Our guide from death to peace!

By angry swords and dark decree
He’s driven from His land.
But still He humbly bows His head
To trust His Father’s hand.

The spotless Lamb lays down His life,
A curse upon a cross.
Then lives that He might guarantee
That no sheep will be lost.

O! May our hearts grow ever fond
Of Mary’s precious boy:
Our Christ, our hope, our heart’s desire,
Our King and Sov’reign Joy!
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_beautiful_the_sight.php

How beautiful the sight
Of brethren who agree
In friendship to unite,
And bonds of charity;
’Tis like the precious ointment, shed
O’er all his robes, from Aaron’s head.

’Tis like the dews that fill
The cups of Hermon’s flowers;
Or Zion’s fruitful hill,
Bright with the drops of showers,
When mingling odors breathe around,
And glory rests on all the ground

For there the Lord commands
Blessings, a boundless store,
From His unsparing hands,
Yea, life forevermore;
Thrice happy they who meet above
To spend eternity in love!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_beautiful_you_are.php

I will rejoice in You and be glad, oh so glad
I will delight in Your presence, how beautiful You are
With such great excitement my spirit arises
To hear Your sweet voice
I belong to You beloved,
and You are mine

How beautiful You are. I just can't get enough
Day after day and moment by moment
I desire more of Your love

I will rejoice in You and be glad, oh so glad
I will delight in Your presence, how beautiful You are
With such great excitement my spirit arises
To hear Your sweet voice
I belong to You beloved,
and You are mine

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_bittersweet_the_mystery.php

HOW BITTER-SWEET THE MYSTERY © 2005 Eric Schu­mach­er. Per­miss­ion grant­ed to 
re­pro­duce un­al­tered text in non­sal­a­ble, tem­po­ra­ry wor­ship me­dia. All 
other us­es re­quire the per­miss­ion of the au­thor.

How bitter-sweet the mystery:
Christ Jesus crucified.
Yet, He is not the guilty one,
No sin, though still He dies.

Hung on a cross of rugged wood,
Received He from God’s hand,
The penalty, the wage of sin,
Deserved by wicked man.

O! Even more hope we shall find
Beyond the death He died.
Consider this, that from the grave
He rose and is alive.

For to this end Christ Jesus died
Was raised and lives again;
That He might be the Lord of both
The dead and the living!

What glorious day we long await
When Christ His church shall raise.
Since then for all eternity
The Risen One we’ll praise.

God demonstrates His love in this:
While we were yet in sin,
Christ Jesus died on our behalf.
We’re saved from wrath through Him!

Now sinner, hear! To His grace turn!
Repent, and be forgiv’n—
United with Him in His death;
Alive with Him now ris’n.

HOW BITTER-SWEET THE MYSTERY © 2005 Eric Schu­mach­er. Per­miss­ion grant­ed to 
re­pro­duce un­al­tered text in non­sal­a­ble, tem­po­ra­ry wor­ship me­dia. All 
other us­es re­quire the per­miss­ion of the au­thor.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_blessed_is_the_man.php

Don't walk with the wicked, don't sit with the scoffer
Don't stand with the sinner, they've nothin' to offer


How blessed is the man,

how blessed is the man

Who puts his trust in

the Law of the Lord


He is like a tree planted by water

Bears fruit in it's season, it's leaf never withers (chorus)


In all that he does the righteous will prosper

Not so for the wicked, they're headin' for disaster (chorus)


How blessed is the man,

how blessed is the man

Who puts his trust in

the Law of the Lord




Who puts his trust in

the Law of the Lord

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_blessed_from_the_bonds_of_sin.php

How blessèd, from the bonds of sin
And earthly fetters free,
In singleness of heart and aim,
Thy servant, Lord, to be;
The hardest toil to undertake
With joy at Thy command,
The meanest office to receive
With meekness at Thy hand.

With willing heart and longing eyes
To watch before Thy gate,
Ready to run the weary race,
To bear the heavy weight;
No voice of thunder to expect,
But follow calm and still;
For love can easily divine
The One Belovèd’s will.

Thus may I serve Thee, gracious Lord;
Thus ever Thine alone,
My soul and body given to Thee,
The purchase Thou hast won;
Through evil or through good report
Still keeping by Thy side;
And by my life or by my death
Let Christ be magnified.

How happily the working days
In this dear service fly,
How rapidly the closing hour,
The time of rest, draws nigh,
When all the faithful gather home,
A joyful company;
And ever where the Master is
Shall His blest servants be.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_blest_are_all_the_saints.php

How blest are all the saints, our God,
who having crossed the troubled sea,
have gained the harbor of your peace
and rest in your tranquility.

Watch over us who voyage still,
with risk and danger yet to face;
remember all beset by storms
and hold them in your steadfast grace.

Our vessel's frail, the ocean wide;
but your love steers, and we aspire
to gain the peaceful shore at last,
the haven of our heart's desire.

Then we shall praise you endlessly,
great God, to whom all praise is due;
as you have made us for yourself,
our hearts must find their rest in you.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_blest_are_they_who_hear_gods_word.php

How blest are they who hear God’s Word
And keep and heed what they have heard!
They wisdom daily gather;
Their light shines brighter day by day,
And while they tread life’s weary way,
They have the oil of gladness
To soothe their pain and sadness.

God’s Word a treasure is to me,
Through sorrow’s night my sun shall be,
The shield of faith in battle.
The Father’s hand hath written there
My title as His child and heir,
“The kingdom’s thine forever."
That promise faileth never.

Today I was my Savior’s guest,
My soul was here so richly blest,
The Bread of Life receiving.
Oh, may thereby my faith prevail,
So that its fruits shall never fail
Till my account is given
Before the throne in Heaven!


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_blest_is_he_whose_trespass.php

How blest is he whose trespass
Hath freely been forgiv’n,
Whose sin is wholly covered
Before the sight of Heav’n.
But he to whom Jehovah
Will not impute his sin,
Who has a guileless spirit,
Whose heart is true within.

While I kept guilty silence
My strength was spent with grief;
Thy hand was heavy on me,
My soul found no relief;
But when I owned my trespass,
My sin hid not from Thee,
When I confessed transgression,
Then Thou forgavest me.

So let the godly seek Thee
In times when Thou art near;
No whelming floods shall reach them,
Nor cause their hearts to fear.
In Thee, O Lord, I hide me,
Thou savest me from ill,
And songs of Thy salvation
My heart with rapture thrill.

I graciously will teach thee
The way that thou shalt go,
And with Mine eye upon thee
My counsel make thee know.
But be ye not unruly,
Or slow to understand,
Be not perverse, but willing
To heed My wise command.

The sorrows of the wicked
In number shall abound,
But those that trust Jehovah,
His mercy shall surround.
Then in the Lord be joyful,
In song lift up your voice;
Be glad in God, ye righteous,
Rejoice, ye saints, rejoice.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_blest_is_life.php

How blest is life if lived for thee,
My loving Saviour and my Lord!
No pleasures that the world can give
Such perfect gladness can afford -

To know I am thy ransomed child,
Bought by thine own most precious blood;
And from thy loving hand to take
With grateful heart each gift of good;

All day to walk beneath thy smile,
Watching thine eye to guide me still;
To rest at night beneath thy care,
Guarded by thee from every ill;

To feel that though I journey on
By stony paths and rugged ways,
Thy blessed feet have gone before,
And strength is given for weary days.

Such love shall ever make me glad,
Strong in thy strength to work or rest,
Until I see thee face to face,
And in thy light am fully blest.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_blest_the_man_who_fears_the_lord.php

How blest the man who fears the Lord
And greatly loves God’s holy will;
His children share his great reward,
And blessings all their days shall fill.

Abounding wealth shall bless his home,
His righteousness shall still endure,
To him shall light arise in gloom,
For he is merciful and pure.

The man whose hand the weak befriends
In judgment shall his cause maintain;
A peace unmoved his life attends,
And long his memory shall remain.

Of evil tidings not afraid,
His trust is in the Lord alone;
His heart is steadfast, undismayed,
For he shall see his foes o’erthrown.

With kind remembrance of the poor,
For their distress his gifts provide;
His righteousness shall thus endure,
His name in honor shall abide.

To shame the wicked shall be brought,
While righteous men shall favor gain;
Unrighteous hopes shall come to naught,
Its due reward shall sin obtain.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_blest_the_man_who_thoughtfully.php

How blest the man who thoughtfully
The poor and weak befriends;
Deliverance in the evil day
To him Jehovah sends.
The Lord will keep him, guard his life,
On earth he shall be blest;
The Lord will not surrender him
By foes to be distressed.

Upon the bed of suffering
Jehovah will sustain,
And in his sickness God will soothe
The weariness and pain.
O Lord, to Thee my cry ascends,
Let me Thy mercy see;
Heal Thou my soul, for I have sinned,
I have offended Thee.

My enemies against me speak,
And they my life have scorned;
They wish my name to pass away,
Unhonored and unmourned.
My foe, deceitful, visits me,
By seeming kindness led,
His heart intent on gathering
Some hurtful news to spread.

My foes, together whispering,
Their evil plans devise;
Disease, they say, cleaves fast to him,
Laid low, he shall not rise.
Yea, he who was my chosen friend,
In whom I put my trust,
Who ate my bread, now turns in wrath
To crush me in the dust.

Do Thou, Jehovah, show me grace,
And raise me up again,
That I with justice may requite
These base and wicked men.
By this I know assuredly
That I am loved by Thee,
Because my foe does not exult
In triumph over me.

And as for me, in uprightness
Thou dost uphold me well,
And settest me before Thy face
Forevermore to dwell.
Blest be Jehovah, Israel’s God
Forevermore. Amen.
Let age to age eternally
Repeat his praise. Amen.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_blest_the_matron_who_endued.php

How blest the matron, who, endued
With holy zeal and fortitude,
Has won through grace a saintly fame,
And owns a dear and honored name.

Such holy love inflamed her breast
She would not seek on earth her rest,
But, strong in faith and patience, trod
The narrow way that leads to God.

She learned, through fasting, to control
The flesh that weigheth down the soul,
And then, by prayer’s sweet food sustained,
To seek the joys she now has gained.

O Christ, from Whom all virtue springs,
Who only doest wondrous things,
To Thee, the King of saints, we pray,
Accept and bless Thy flock today.

All praise to God the Father be,
All praise, eternal Son, to Thee,
Whom with the Spirit we adore
For ever and for evermore.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_blest_the_perfect_in_the_way.php

How blest the perfect in the way,
Who from God’s law do not depart,
Who, holding fast the Word of truth,
Seek Him with undivided heart.

Yea, they are kept from paths of sin
Who walk in God’s appointed way;
Thy precepts Thou hast given us
That we should faithfully obey.

My wavering heart is now resolved
Thy holy statutes o fulfill;
No more shall I be brought to shame
When I regard Thy holy will.

To Thee my praise sincere shall rise
When I Thy righteous judgments learn;
Forsake me not, but be my Guide,
And from Thy truth I will not turn.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_blest_the_righteous_when_he_dies.php

How blest the righteous when he dies!
When sinks a weary soul to rest,
How mildly beam the closing eyes,
How gently heaves th’expiring breast!

So fades a summer cloud away;
So sinks a gale when storms are o’er;
So gently shuts the eye of day;
So dies a wave along the shore.

A holy quiet reigns around,
A calm which life nor death destroys;
And naught disturbs that peace profound
Which his unfettered soul enjoys.

Farewell, conflicting hopes and fears,
Where lights and shades alternate dwell;
How bright th’unchanging morn appears!
Farewell, inconstant world, farewell!

Life’s labor done, as sinks the clay,
Light from its load the spirit flies,
While Heav’n and earth combine to say,
“How blest the righteous when he dies!"
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_bright_appears_the_morning_star.php

How bright appears the morning star,
With mercy beaming from afar!
The host of Heav’n rejoices!
O righteous Branch! O Jesse’s Rod!
Thou Son of man, and Son of God!
We too will lift our voices
Jesus! Jesus! Holy, holy! yet most lowly!
Draw Thou near us:
Great Emmanuel! stoop and hear us!

Rejoice, ye heav’ns, thou earth, reply!
With praise, ye sinners, fill the sky!
For this His incarnation!
Incarnate God, put forth Thy power,
Ride on, ride on, great Conqueror,
Till all know Thy salvation.
Amen, amen! Alleluia, alleluia!
Praise be given
Evermore, by earth and Heaven.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_bright_these_spirits_shine.php

How bright these glorious spirits shine!
Whence all their white array?
How came they to the blissful seats
Of everlasting day?

Lo! these are they from sufferings great
Who came to realms of light;
And in the blood of Christ have washed
Those robes which shine so bright. 

Now with triumphal palms they stand
Before the throne on high,
And serve the God they love amidst
The glories of the sky.

His presence fills each heart with joy,
Tunes every mouth to sing:
By day, by night, the sacred courts
With glad hosannas ring.

Hunger and thirst are felt no more,
Nor suns with scorching ray;
God is their Sun, Whose cheering beams
Diffuse eternal day.

The Lamb, Which dwells amidst the throne
Shall over them still preside,
Feed them with nourishment divine,
And all their footsteps guide.

Midst pastures green He’ll lead His flock
Where living streams appear;
And God the Lord from every eye
Shall wipe off every tear.

To Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
The God Whom we adore,
Be glory, as it was, is now,
And shall be evermore.

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_bright_these_spirits_shine.php

How bright these glorious spirits shine!
Whence all their white array?
How came they to the blissful seats
Of everlasting day?

Lo! these are they from sufferings great
Who came to realms of light;
And in the blood of Christ have washed
Those robes which shine so bright. 

Now with triumphal palms they stand
Before the throne on high,
And serve the God they love amidst
The glories of the sky.

His presence fills each heart with joy,
Tunes every mouth to sing:
By day, by night, the sacred courts
With glad hosannas ring.

Hunger and thirst are felt no more,
Nor suns with scorching ray;
God is their Sun, Whose cheering beams
Diffuse eternal day.

The Lamb, Which dwells amidst the throne
Shall over them still preside,
Feed them with nourishment divine,
And all their footsteps guide.

Midst pastures green He’ll lead His flock
Where living streams appear;
And God the Lord from every eye
Shall wipe off every tear.

To Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
The God Whom we adore,
Be glory, as it was, is now,
And shall be evermore.

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_calm_and_beautiful_the_morn.php

How calm and beautiful the morn
That gilds the sacred tomb,
Where Christ the Crucified was borne,
And veiled in midnight gloom!
O weep no more the Savior slain;
The Lord is risen; He lives again.

Ye mourning saints, dry every tear
For your departed Lord;
Behold the place, He is not here,
The tomb is all unbarred;
The gates of death were closed in vain:
The Lord is risen; He lives again.

Now cheerful to the house of prayer
Your early footsteps bend;
The Savior will Himself be there,
Your Advocate and Friend:
Once by the law your hopes were slain,
But now in Christ ye live again.

How tranquil now the rising day!
’Tis Jesus still appears,
A risen Lord to chase away
Your unbelieving fears:
O weep no more your comforts slain;
The Lord is risen; He lives again.

And when the shades of evening fall,
When life’s last hour draws nigh,
If Jesus shine upon the soul,
How blissful then to die!
Since He has risen that once was slain,
Ye die in Christ to live again.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_can_i_help_but_love_him.php

Down from His splendor in glory He came,
Into a world of woe;
Took on Himself all my guilt and my shame,
Why should He love me so?

Refrain

How can I help but love Him,
When He loved me so?
How can I help but love Him,
When He loved me so?

I am unworthy to take of His grace,
Wonderful grace so free;
Yes, Jesus suffered and died in my place,
E’en for a soul like me.

Refrain

He is the fairest of thousands to me,
His love is sweet and true;
Wonderful beauty in Him I now see,
More than I ever knew.

Refrain
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_can_i_keep_from_singing.php

My life flows on in endless song;
Above earth’s lamentation
I hear the sweet though far off hymn
That hails a new creation:
Through all the tumult and the strife
I hear the music ringing;
It finds an echo in my soul—
How can I keep from singing?

What though my joys and comforts die?
The Lord my Savior liveth;
What though the darkness gather round!
Songs in the night He giveth:
No storm can shake my inmost calm
While to that refuge clinging;
Since Christ is Lord of Heav’n and earth,
How can I keep from singing?

I lift mine eyes; the cloud grows thin;
I see the blue above it;
And day by day this pathway smoothes
Since first I learned to love it:
The peace of Christ makes fresh my heart,
A fountain ever springing:
All things are mine since I am His—
How can I keep from singing?
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_can_i_look_on_calvarys_cross.php



How can I look on Calv’ry’s cross
And see my Savior there,
With outstretched arms the world to save,
My sins Himself to bear?
How contemplate and yet withstand
Such love as He has shown
Who died to draw the sinner near
And claim him for His own?

Refrain

O love of God, that bro’t me there,
O love so deep, so true,
Come fill my longing heart with light
And rapture, thro’ and thro’.

How can I think of all He bore—
The shame, the thorns, the pain,
And unrepentant go my way
To pierce His heart again?
Forsaken in His darkest hour
By all, except His God,
Shall I deny my blessèd Lord,
Who died to lift the rod?

Refrain

No, no! I cannot traitor be
To Jesus, King of Love,
Tho’ sinner steeped in guilt I am,
His mercy I will prove;
His blood on Calv’ry’s cross was shed,
To save e’en such as me;
O Jesus, now accept my all,
And draw me close to Thee.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_can_i_sink_with_such_a_prop.php




1. How Can I Sink With Such a Prop, 
As my eternal God,
Who bears the earth's huge pillars up,
And spreads the heav'ns abroad?

2. How can I die while Jesus lives,
Who rose and left the dead
Pardon and grace my soul receives,
From my exalted Head.

3. All that I am, and all I have,
Shall be forever thine;
Whate'er my duty bids me give,
My cheerful hands resign.

4. Yet if I might make some reserve,
And duty did not call,
I love my God with zeal so great,
That I should give him all.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_can_i_thank_thee.php

1. How can I thank Thee, Lord,
For all Thy loving-kindness,
That Thou hast patiently
Borne with me in my blindness?
When dead in many sins
And trespasses I lay,
I kindled, holy God,
Thine anger every day. 

2. It is Thy work alone
That I am now converted;
O'er Satan's work in me
Thou hast Thy power asserted.
Thy mercy and Thy grace
That rise afresh each morn
Have turned my stony heart
Into a heart new-born. 

3. I could but grieve Thee, Lord,
And with my sins displease Thee;
Yet to atone for sin
My works could not appease Thee.
Though I could fall from grace
And choose the way of sin,
I had no strength to rise,
A new life to begin. 

4. But Thou hast raised me up
To joy and exultation
And clearly shown the way
That leads me to salvation.
My sins are washed away,
For this I thank thee, Lord;
And with my heart and soul
All dead works are abhorred. 

5. Grant that Thy Spirit's help
To me be always given
Lest I should fall again
And lose the way to heaven;
That He may give me strength
In mine infirmity
And e'er renew my heart
To serve Thee willingly. 

6. Oh, guide and lead me, Lord,
While here below I wander
That I may follow Thee
Till I shall see Thee yonder.
For if I led myself,
I soon would go astray;
But if Thou leadest me,
I keep the narrow way. 

7. O Father, God of Love,
Hear Thou my supplication;
O Savior, Son of God,
Grant me Thy full salvation;
And Thou, O Holy Ghost,
Be Thou my faithful Guide
That I may serve Thee here
And there with Thee abide.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_can_i_truly_say.php

How can I truly show that I love you? 
How can I truly say how I need you? 
How can I really share what I'm feeling? 
Can I reveal my heart as I'm kneeling? 

How can I ever learn your compassion? 
Covered and clothed with Christ for my fashion 
Turning aside I feel godly sorrow 
You confidently secure my tomorrow 

How can I truly show that I love you? 
How can I truly say how I need you? 
How can I really share what I'm feeling? 
How can I truly say?


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_can_i_lord_keep_my_way_pure.php

How can I, Lord, keep my way pure?
To Your Word I must be true.
So I seek You with my whole heart;
Do not let me stray from You.

Your Word’s hidden in my heart, Lord,
That I might not go astray.
Praise to You, O Lord, my Father;
Teach me Your decrees each day.

With my lips I recount gladly
All the laws You’ve giv’n to man.
I rejoice in all Your statutes,
As in wealth too vast to scan.

Meditating on Your precepts,
I consider all Your ways.
I delight in Your decrees, Lord;
I will never turn away.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_can_we_sinners_know.php

How can we sinners know
Our sins on earth forgiven?
How can my gracious Savior show
My name inscribed in heaven?

What we have felt and seen,
With confidence we tell,
And publish to the ends of earth
The signs infallible.

We who in Christ believe
That He for us hath died,
We all His unknown peace receive
And feel His blood applied.

Exults for joy our rising soul,
Disburthened of her load,
And swells, unutterably full
Of glory and of God.

His love surpasses far
The love of all beneath,
We find within, and dare
The pointless darts of death.

Stronger than death, or sin, or hell,
The mystic power we prove,
And conquerors of the world we dwell
In heaven, who dwell in love.

We by His Spirit prove
And know the things of God,
The things which freely of His love
He hath on us bestowed.

The meek and lowly heart
That in our Savior was,
To us that Spirit doth impart
And sign us with His cross.

Our nature’s turned, our mind
Transformed in all its powers,
And both the witnesses are joined,
The Spirit of God with ours.

His glory is our sole design,
We live our God to please,
And rise with filial fear divine
To perfect holiness.

The Spirit of my God
Hath certified Him mine,
And all the tokens showed,
Infallible, divine.

Hereby the pardoned sinner knows
His sins on earth forgiven,
And thus my gracious Savior shows
My name inscribed in Heaven.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_can_you_say_no1.php

Thorns on His head, spear in His side
Yet it was a heartache that made Him cry
He gave His life so you would understand
Is there any way you could say no to this Man?

If Christ Himself (standing here)
Were standing here (glory in His face)
Face full of glory and eyes full of tears (eyes, hold out His arms)
He'd hold out His arms with His nail-printed hands (nail scarred hands, how 
could you say no)
Is there any way you could say no to this Man?

Chorus:
How could you look in His tear-stained eyes
Knowing it's you He's thinking of?
Would you tell Him you're not ready to give Him your life?
Could you say you don't think you need His love?

Jesus is here with His arms open wide
You can see Him with your heart if you'll stop looking with your eyes
He's left it up to you, He's done all He can
Is there any way you could say no to this Man?

Repeat Chorus (with echoes) (x2)

Thorns on His head, your life is in His hands
Is there any way you could say no to this Man?

Oh, is there any way you could say no to this Man?


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_charming_is_this_place.php

How charming is the place

Where my Redeemer God
Unveils the beauties of His face,
And sheds His love abroad.

Not the fair palaces
To which the great resort,
Are once to be compared with this,
Where Jesus holds His court.

Here, on the mercy seat,
With radiant glory crowned,
Our joyful eyes behold Him sit,
And smile on all around.

To Him their prayers and cries
Each humble soul presents:
He listens to their broken sighs,
And grants them all their wants.

To them His sovereign will
He graciously imparts;
And in return accepts, with smiles,
The tribute of their hearts.

Give me, O Lord, a place
Within Thy blest abode,
Among the children of Thy grace,
The servants of my God.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_charmingly_pleasing.php

1, How charmingly pleasing the fond recollection.
Of youthful emotions and innocent joy,
When blessed with parental advice and affection,
Surrounded with mercy and peace from on high.
I still view the chairs of my father and mother,
The seats of their offspring, as ranged on each hand,
And the richest of books, which excels every other
The family Bible that lay on the stand:

Chorus:

The old-fashioned Bible, the dear blessed Bible,
The family Bible that lay on the stand.

2. The Bible, that volume of God's inspiration,
At morning and ev'ning would yield delight;
The prayers of our father, a sweet invocation,
For mercy by day, and for safety by night.
O, hymns of thanksgiving, with harmon'ous sweetness,
As warmed by the hearts of the family band,
Hath raised us from earth to that rapturous dwelling,
Described in the Bible that lay on the stand.

3, Ye scenes of enjoyment, long have we been parted,
My hopes almost gone, and my parents no more;
In sorrow and sadness I live broken-hearted,
And wander alone on a far-distant shore.
O, why should I doubt a dear Savior's protection,
Forgetful of gifts from his bountiful hand?
O, let me with patience receive His correction,
And think of the Bible that lay on the stand.

4. Though age and misfortune press hard on my feelings
I'll flee to the Bible and trust in the Lord;
Though darkness should cover his merciful dealings,
My soul is still cheered by His heavenly word.
And now from things earthly my soul is removing,
I shall soon be in glory with heav'n's bright band,
And in rapture of joy be forever adoring
The God of the Bible that lay on the stand.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_cheering_is_the_christians_hope.php

How cheering is the Christian’s hope,
While toiling here below!
It buoys us up while passing through
This wilderness of woe.
It buoys us up while passing through
This wilderness of woe.

It points us to a land of rest,
Where saints with Christ will reign;
Where we shall meet the loved of earth,
And never part again.
Where we shall meet the loved of earth,
And never part again.

Fly, lingering moments, fly, O fly;
Dear Savior, quickly come!
We long to see Thee as Thou art,
And reach that blissful shore.
We long to see Thee as Thou art,
And reach that blissful shore.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_condescending_and_how_kind.php

1. How Condescending and How Kind
Was God's exalted Son!
Our mis'ry reached His heav'nly mind,
And pity brought Him down.

2. When justice, by our sins provoked,
Drew forth His dreadful sword,
He gave His soul up to the stroke
Without a murm'ring word.

3. This was compassion like a God,
That when the Savior knew
The way of pardon was His blood,
His pity ne'er withdrew.

4. Now though He reigns exalted high,
His love is still as great;
Well He remembers Calvary
Nor lets His saints forget.

5. Here we receive repeated seals
Of Jesus' saving love;
Hard is the wretch that never feels
One soft affection move.

6. Here let our hearts begin to melt,
While we His death record,
And with our joy for pardoned guilt
Mourn that we pierced the Lord.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_david_when_by_sin_deceived.php

How David, when by sin deceived,
From bad to worse went on!
For when the Holy Spirit’s grieved,
Our strength and guard are gone.

His eye on Bathsheba once fixed,
With poison filled his soul;
He ventured on adultery next,
And murder crowned the whole.

So from a spark of fire at first,
That has not been descried;
A dreadful flame has often burst,
And ravaged far and wide.

When sin deceives it hardens too,
For though he vainly fought
To hide his crimes from public view,
Of God he little thought.

He neither would, or could repent,
No true compunction felt;
’Till God in mercy Nathan sent,
His stubborn heart to melt.

The parable held forth a fact,
Designed his case to show;
But though the picture was exact,
Himself he did not know.

“Thou art the man," the prophet said,
That word his slumber broke;
And when he owned his sin, and prayed,
The Lord forgiveness spoke.

Let those who think they stand, beware,
For David stood before;
Nor let the fallen soul despair,
For mercy can restore.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_dear_to_me_o_lord_of_hosts.php

How dear to me, O Lord of Hosts,
The place where Thou dost dwell;
The tabernacles of Thy grace
In pleasantness excel.

My spirit longs, yea, even faints,
Thy sacred courts to see;
My thirsting heart and flesh cry out,
O living God, for Thee.

Beneath Thy care the sparrow finds
A place of peaceful rest;
Where she may safely lay her young
The swallow finds a nest.

Then, Lord of Hosts, my King, my God,
Thy love will shelter me;
Beneath Thy altar’s peaceful shade
My dwelling place shall be.

Blest they who dwell within Thy house,
Their perfect strength Thou art;
Their joyful praise shall never cease,
Thy ways are in their heart.

Their tears of grief, like early rain,
Sweet springs of joy shall fill;
With strength renewed they journey safe
To Zion’s holy hill.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_deep_the_fathers_love_for_us.php

How deep the Father's love for us, how vast beyond all measure
That he should give his only son, to make a wretch his treasure
How great the pain of searing loss, the Father turned his face away
As wounds which mar the chosen one, bring many sons to glory

Behold the man upon a cross, my sin upon his shoulders
Ashamed, I hear my mocking voice call out among the scoffers
It was my sin that held him there until it was accomplished
His dying breath has brought me life; I know that it is finished

I will not boast in anything: no gifts, no power, no wisdom
But I will boast in Jesus Christ; his death and resurrection
Why should I gain from his reward? I cannot give an answer
But this I know with all my heart: his wounds have paid my ransom

© 1995 Kingsway's Thankyou Music
CCLI #1596342
Album: I Could Sing of Your Love Forever 2

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_did_my_heart_rejoice_to_hear.php

How did my heart rejoice to hear
My friends devoutly say,
“In Zion let us all appear,
And keep the solemn day!"

I love her gates, I love the road;
The church, adorned with grace,
Stands like a palace built for God,
To show His milder face.

Up to her courts with joys unknown
The holy tribes repair;
The Son of David holds His throne,
And sits in judgment there.

He hears our praises and complaints;
And while His awful voice
Divides the sinners from the saints,
We tremble and rejoice.

Peace be within this sacred place,
And joy a constant guest!
With holy gifts and heav’nly grace
Be her attendants blest!

My soul shall pray for Zion still,
While life or breath remains;
There my best friends, my kindred dwell,
There God my Savior reigns.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_do_thy_mercies_close_me_round.php

How do thy mercies close me round!
For ever be thy name adored!
I blush in all things to abound;
The servant is above his Lord!

Inured to poverty and pain,
A suffering life my Master led;
The Son of God, the Son of man,
He had not where to lay his head.

But lo! a place he hath prepared
For me, whom watchful angels keep;
Yea, he himself becomes my guard,
He smooths my bed, and gives me sleep.

Jesus protects; my fears, be gone!
What can the Rock of ages move?
Safe in thy arms I lay me down,
Thy everlasting arms of love.

While thou art intimately nigh,
Who, who shall violate my rest?
Sin, earth, and hell I now defy;
I lean upon my Saviour's breast.

I rest beneath the Almighty's shade,
My griefs expire, my troubles cease;
Thou, Lord, on whom my soul is stayed,
Wilt keep me still in perfect peace.

Me for thine own thou lov'st to take,
In time and in eternity;
Thou never, never wilt forsake
A helpless soul that trusts in thee.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_excellent_is_thy_name.php

How excellent is thy name

In all the earth, O Lord!
How excellent is thy name,
By all in heaven adored.
How excellent is thy name.
Let men their praises bring;
How excellent is thy name.
Of mighty kings the King!

Tho' far above all the heavens,
Their heighth and breadth and length,
From out of the mouths of babes
Thou hast ordained strength.
How excellent is thy name.
In all the earth, O Lord!
How excellent is thy name.
By all in heaven adored.

In view of thy wondrous works,
The moon and stars on high,
Oh! what is poor. feeble man
That thou should'st mind his cry?
How excellent is thy name.
Let earth thy glories sing;
How excellent is thy name.
Of mighty kings the King!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_far_from_home.php

How far from home? I asked, as on
I bent my steps—the watchman spake:
“The long, dark night is almost gone,
The morning soon will break.
Then weep no more, but speed thy flight,
With Hope’s bright star thy guiding ray,
Till thou shalt reach the realms of light,
In everlasting day."

I asked the warrior on the field;
This was his soul inspiring song:
“With courage bold, the sword I’ll wield,
The battle is not long.
Then weep no more, but well endure
The conflict, till thy work is done;
For this we know, the prize is sure,
When victory is won."

I asked again; earth, sea and sun
Seemed, with one voice, to make reply:
“Time’s wasting sands are nearly run,
Eternity is nigh.
Then weep no more—with warning tones,
Portentous sights are thickening round,
The whole creation, waiting, groans,
To hear the trumpet sound."

Not far from home! O blessèd thought!
The traveler’s lonely heart to cheer;
Which oft a healing balm has brought,
And dried the mourner’s tear.
Then weep no more, since we shall meet
Where weary footsteps never roam—
Our trials past, our joys complete,
Safe in our Father’s home.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_fast_their_guilt_and_sorrows_rise.php

How fast their guilt and sorrows rise
Who haste to seek some idol-god!
I will not taste their sacrifice,
Their offerings of forbidden blood.

My God provides a richer cup,
And nobler food to live upon:
He for my life has offered up
Jesus, His best-belovèd Son.

His love is my perpetual feast;
By day His counsels guide me right;
And be His Name for ever blessed,
Who gives me sweet advice by night.

I set Him still before mine eyes;
At my right hand He stands prepared
To keep my soul from all surprise
And be my everlasting guard

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_few_receive_with_cordial_faith.php

How few receive with cordial faith 
The tidings which we bring? 
How few have seen the arm revealed 
Of Heav’n’s eternal King?

The Savior comes! no outward pomp 
Bespeaks His presence nigh; 
No earthly beauty shines in Him 
To draw the carnal eye.

Fair as a beauteous tender flower 
Amidst the desert grows, 
So slighted by a rebel race 
The heav’nly Savior rose.

Rejected and despised of men, 
Behold a Man of woe! 
Grief was His close companion still 
Through all His life below.

Yet all the griefs He felt were ours, 
Ours were the woes He bore: 
Pangs, not His own, His spotless soul 
With bitter anguish tore.

We held Him as condemned by Heav’n, 
An outcast from His God, 
While for our sins He groaned, He bled, 
Beneath His Father’s rod.

His sacred blood hath washed our souls 
From sin’s polluted stain; 
His stripes have healed us, and His death 
Revived our souls again.

We all, like sheep, had gone astray 
In ruin’s fatal road: 
On Him were our transgressions laid; 
He bore the mighty load.

Wronged and oppressed how meekly He 
In patient silence stood! 
Mute, as the peaceful harmless lamb, 
When brought to shed its blood.

Who can His generation tell? 
From prison see Him led! 
With impious show of law condemned, 
And numbered with the dead.

’Midst sinners low in dust He lay; 
The rich a grave supplied: 
Unspotted was His blameless life; 
Unstained by sin He died.

Yet God shall raise His head on high, 
Though thus He brought Him low; 
His sacred offering, when complete, 
Shall terminate His woe.

For, saith the Lord, My pleasure then 
Shall prosper in His hand; 
His shall a numerous offspring be, 
And still His honors stand.

His soul, rejoicing, shall behold 
The purchase of His pain; 
And all the guilty whom He saved 
Shall bless Messiah’s reign.

He with the great shall share the spoil, 
And baffle all His foes; 
Though ranked with sinners, here He fell, 
A Conqueror He rose.

He died to bear the guilt of men, 
That sin might be forgiv’n: 
He lives to bless them and defend, 
And plead their cause in Heav’n.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_firm_a_foundation.php

How firm a foundation, ye saints of the Lord,
Is laid for your faith in His excellent Word!
What more can He say than to you He hath said,
You, who unto Jesus for refuge have fled?

In every condition, in sickness, in health;
In poverty’s vale, or abounding in wealth;
At home and abroad, on the land, on the sea,
As thy days may demand, shall thy strength ever be.

Fear not, I am with thee, O be not dismayed,
For I am thy God and will still give thee aid;
I’ll strengthen and help thee, and cause thee to stand
Upheld by My righteous, omnipotent hand.

When through the deep waters I call thee to go,
The rivers of woe shall not thee overflow;
For I will be with thee, thy troubles to bless,
And sanctify to thee thy deepest distress.

When through fiery trials thy pathways shall lie,
My grace, all sufficient, shall be thy supply;
The flame shall not hurt thee; I only design
Thy dross to consume, and thy gold to refine.

Even down to old age all My people shall prove
My sovereign, eternal, unchangeable love;
And when hoary hairs shall their temples adorn,
Like lambs they shall still in My bosom be borne.

The soul that on Jesus has leaned for repose,
I will not, I will not desert to its foes;
That soul, though all hell should endeavor to shake,
I’ll never, no never, no never forsake.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_gentle_gods_commands.php

How gentle God’s commands,
How kind His precepts are!
Come, cast your burdens on the Lord,
And trust His constant care.

Beneath His watchful eye
His saints securely dwell;
That hand which bears all nature up
Shall guide His children well.

Why should this anxious load
Press down your weary mind?
Haste to your Heavenly Father’s throne,
And sweet refreshment find.

His goodness stands approved,
Down to the present day;
I’ll drop my burden at His feet,
And bear a song away.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_glorious_is_the_life_above.php

How glorious is the life above
Which in this ordinance we taste,
That fullness of celestial love,
That joy which shall for ever last!

That heavenly life in Christ concealed
These earthen vessels could not bear;
The part which now we find revealed
No tongue of angels can declare.

The light of life eternal darts
Into our souls a dazzling ray;
A drop of Heaven o’erflows our hearts,
And deluges the house of clay.

Sure pledge of ecstasies unknown
Shall this divine communion be:
The ray shall rise into a sun,
The drop shall swell into a sea.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_glorious_sions_courts_appear.php

How glorious Sion’s courts appear,
The city of our God!
His throne He hath established here
Here fixed His loved abode.

Its wall, defended by His grace
No power shall e’er o’erthrow,
Salvation is its bulwark sure
Against th’ assailing foe.

Lift up the everlasting gates,
The doors wide open fling;
Enter, ye nations, who obey
The statutes of our King.

Here shall ye taste unmingled joys,
And dwell in perfect peace,
Ye, who have known Jehovah’s Name,
And trusted in His grace.

Trust in the Lord, forever trust,
And banish all your fears;
Strength in the Lord Jehovah dwells
Eternal as His years.

What though the wicked dwell on high,
His arm shall bring them low;
Low as the caverns of the grave
Their lofty heads shall bow.

Along the dust shall then be spread
Their towers, that brave the skies:
On them the needy’s feet shall tread,
And on their ruins rise.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_good_and_pleasant_is_the_sight.php

How good and pleasant is the sight
When brethren make it their delight
To dwell in blest accord;
Such love is like anointing oil
That consecrates for holy toil
The servants of the Lord.

Such love in peace and joy distils,
As o’er the slopes of Hermon’s hills
Refreshing dew descends;
The Lord commands His blessing there,
And they that walk in love shall share
In life that never ends.

How good and pleasant is the sight
When brethren make it their delight
To dwell in blest accord;
The Lord commands His blessing there,
And they that walk in love shall share
In life that never ends.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_good_it_is_to_thank_the_lord.php

How good it is to thank the Lord,
And praise to Thee, Most High, accord,
To show Thy love with morning light,
And tell Thy faithfulness each night;
Yea, good it is Thy praise to sing,
And all our sweetest music bring.

O Lord, with joy my heart expands,
Before the wonders of Thy hands;
Great works, Jehovah, Thou hast wrought,
Exceeding deep Thine every thought;
A foolish man knows not their worth,
Nor he whose mind is of the earth.

When as the grass the wicked grow,
When sinners flourish here below,
Then is there endless ruin nigh,
But Thou, O Lord, art throned on high;
Thy foes shall fall before Thy might,
The wicked shall be put to flight.

Thou, Lord, hast high exalted me
With royal strength and dignity;
With Thine anointing I am blest,
Thy grace and favor on me rest;
I thus exult o’er all my foes,
O’er all that would my cause oppose.

The righteous man shall flourish well,
And in the house of God shall dwell;
He shall be like a goodly tree,
And all his life shall fruitful be;
For righteous is the Lord and just,
He is my Rock, in Him I trust.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_good_lord_to_be_here.php

1. How good, Lord, to be here!
Your glory fills the night;
Your face and garments like the sun,
Shine with unborrowed light. 

2. How good, Lord, to be here,
Your beauty to behold,
Where Moses and Elijah stand,
Your messengers of old. 

3. Fulfiller of the past,
Promise of things to be:
We hail your body glorified,
And our redemption see. 

4. Before we taste of death,
We see your kingdom come;
We have to hold the vision bright,
And make this hill our home. 

5. How good, Lord, to be here!
Yet we will not remain;
But since you bid us leave the mount,
Come with us to the plain. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_great_is_the_love.php

Children of God 

There are names that are used for description (There are names used for 
description)
Others use ugly names to offend (Other names are to offend)
Some are called certain things for distinction (Some are called things for 
distinction)
Special names can be given a friend (Some are given to a friend)
From the heart of our Lord's love and caring (From His love and tender caring)
Comes a blessing that we don't deserve (Comes a name we don't deserve)
It's the honor that we can be wearing (It's an honor to be wearing)
The name of the God whom we serve (Special name of whom we serve) 

Chorus:
How great is the love
The Father has lavished on us
That we should be called children of God
How great is the love
The father has lavished on us
That we should be called children of God 

You can easily see who is knowing (You can see now who is knowing)
Telling others about Him each day (Telling 'bout Him every day)
There's a love that will set your heart glowing (Love will set your heart a 
glowing)
When your Father has great things to say (Hearing what He has to say)
It's a love that's unlike any other (Love that's unlike any other)
With a feeling, most healing by far (Feeling, healing, best by far)
Even more that the love of a brother (Even more than of a brother)
Through a name telling all whose we are (Telling all just whose we are) 

Repeat Chorus (x2, with echoes) 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_great_our_joy.php

While by the sheep we watched at night,
Glad tidings brought an angel bright.

Refrain

How great our joy! Great our joy!
Joy, joy, joy! Joy, joy, joy!
Praise we the Lord in heaven on high!
Praise we the Lord in heaven on high!

There shall be born, so He did say,
In Bethlehem a Child today.

Refrain

There shall the Child lie in a stall,
This Child who shall redeem us all.

Refrain

This gift of God we’ll cherish well,
That ever joy our hearts shall fill.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_great_is_the_wisdom.php

How great the wisdom, power and grace,
Which in redemption shine!
The heavenly host with joy confess
The work is all divine.

Before His feet they cast their crowns,
Those crowns which Jesus gave,
And, with ten thousand tongues,
Proclaim His power to save.

They tell the triumphs of His cross,
The sufferings which He bore;
How low He stooped, how high He rose,
And rose to stoop no more.

With them let us our voices raise,
And still the song renew;
Salvation well deserves the praise
Of men, and angels, too.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_happy_are_the_little_flock.php

How happy are the little flock,
Who, safe beneath their guardian Rock,
In all commotions rest!
When war’s and tumult’s waves run high,
Removed above the storm they lie,
They lodge in Jesus’ breast,
They lodge in Jesus’ breast.

Such happiness, O Lord, have we,
By mercy gathered into Thee,
Before the floods descend:
And while the bursting clouds come down,
We mark the vengeful day begun,
And calmly wait the end,
And calmly wait the end.

The plague, and dearth, and din of war,
Our Savior’s swift approach declare,
And bid our hearts arise;
Earth’s basis shook confirms our hope;
Its cities’ fall but lifts us up,
To meet Thee in the skies,
To meet Thee in the skies.

Thy tokens we with joy confess:
The war proclaims the Prince of Peace,
The earthquake speaks Thy power,
The famine all Thy fullness brings,
The plague presents Thy healing wings,
And nature’s final hour,
And nature’s final hour.

Whatever ills the world befall,
A pledge of endless good we call,
A sign of Jesus near;
His chariot will not long delay,
We hear the rumbling wheels, and pray,
Triumphant Lord, appear!
Triumphant Lord, appear!

Appear with clouds on Zion’s hill,
Thy word and mystery to fulfill,
Thy confessors to approve,
Thy members on Thy throne to place,
And stamp Thy name on every face,
In glorious, heavenly love!
In glorious, heavenly love!


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_happy_are_they_servants_lord.php

How happy are Thy servants, Lord,
Who thus remember Thee!
What tongue can tell our sweet accord,
Our perfect harmony?

Who Thy mysterious supper share,
Here at Thy table fed,
Many, and yet but one we are,
One undivided bread.

One with the living bread divine
Which now by faith we eat,
Our hearts and minds and spirits join,
And all in Jesus meet.

So dear the tie where souls agree
In Jesus’ dying love!
Then only can it closer be,
When all are joined above.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_happy_are_they.php

How happy are they
Who the Savior obey,
And have laid up their treasure above!
Tongue can never express
The sweet comfort and peace
Of a soul in its earliest love.

That sweet comfort was mine,
When the Father divine
I first found in the blood of the Lamb;
When my heart first believed,
What a joy I received,
What heaven in Jesus’ Name!

’Twas a heaven below
My Redeemer to know,
And the angels could do nothing more,
Than to fall at His feet,
And the story repeat,
And the Lover of sinners adore.

Jesus all the day long
Was my joy and my song:
O that all His salvation might see!
“He hath loved me," I cried,
“He hath suffered and died,
To redeem a poor rebel like me."

O the rapturous height
Of that holy delight
Which I felt in the life giving blood!
By my Savior possessed,
I was perfect blest,
As if filled with the fullness of God.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_happy_are_we.php

Oh, how happy are we,
Who in Jesus agree,
And expect His return from above;
We sit ’neath His vine,
And delightfully join
In the praise of His excellent love.

Refrain

Oh, how happy are we
Who in Jesus agree,
How happy, how happy are we.

When united to Him,
We partake of the stream
Ever flowing in peace from the throne;
We in Jesus believe,
And the Spirit receive,
That proceeds from the Father and Son.

Refrain

We remember the word
Of our crucified Lord,
When He went to prepare us a place,
“I will come in that day
And will take you away,
And admit to the sight of My face."

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_happy_every_child_of_grace.php

How happy every child of grace,
Who knows his sins forgiven!
“This earth," he cries, “is not my place,
I seek my place in Heaven—
A country far from mortal sight,
Which yet by faith I see,
The land of rest, the saints’ delight,
The heaven prepared for me."

O what a blessèd hope is ours!
While here on earth we stay,
We more than taste the heavenly powers,
And antedate that day.
We feel the resurrection near,
Our life in Christ concealed,
And with His glorious presence here
Our earthen vessels filled.

O would He more of heaven bestow,
And let the vessels break,
And let our ransomed spirits go
To grasp the God we seek;
In rapturous awe on Him to gaze,
Who bought the sight for me;
And shout and wonder at His grace
Through all eternity!
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_happy_is_the_pilgrims_lot.php

How happy is the pilgrim’s lot!
How free from every anxious thought,
From worldly hope and fear!
Confined to neither court nor cell,
His soul disdains on earth to dwell,
He only sojourns here.

This happiness in part is mine,
Already saved from self design,
From every creature love;
Blest with the scorn of finite good,
My soul is lightened of its load,
And seeks the things above.

The things eternal I pursue,
A happiness beyond the view
Of those that basely pant
For things by nature felt and seen;
Their honors, wealth, and pleasures mean
I neither have nor want.

I have no babes to hold me here;
But children more securely dear
For mine I humbly claim,
Better than daughters or than sons,
Temples divine of living stones,
Inscribed with Jesus’ Name.

No foot of land do I possess,
No cottage in this wilderness,
A poor wayfaring man,
I lodge awhile in tents below;
Or gladly wander to and fro,
Till I my Canaan gain.

Nothing on earth I call my own;
A stranger, to the world unknown,
I all their goods despise;
I trample on their whole delight,
And seek a country out of sight,
A country in the skies.

There is my house and portion fair,
My treasure and my heart are there.
And my abiding home;
For me my elder brethren stay,
And angels beckon me away,
And Jesus bids me come.

“I come," Thy servant, Lord, replies,
“I come to meet Thee in the skies,
And claim my heavenly rest";
Now let the pilgrim’s journey end,
Now, O my Savior, Brother, Friend.
Receive me to Thy breast!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_helpless_guilty_nature_lies.php

How helpless guilty nature lies,
Unconscious of its load!
The heart, unchanged, can never rise
To happiness and God.

Can aught, beneath a power divine,
The stubborn will subdue?
’Tis Thine, almighty Spirit! Thine,
To form the heart anew.

’Tis Thine, the passions to recall,
And upward bid them rise;
To make the scales of error fall
From reason’s darkened eyes;

To chase the shades of death away,
And bid the sinner live;
A beam of Heaven, a vital ray,
’Tis Thine alone to give.

O change these wretched hearts of ours,
And give them life divine;
Then shall our passions and our powers
Almighty Lord! be Thine.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_honorable_is_the_place.php



How honorable is the place
Where we adoring stand!
Zion, the glory of the earth,
And beauty of the land!

Bulwarks of mighty grace defend
The city where we dwell;
The walls, of strong salvation made,
Defy the assaults of hell.

Lift up the everlasting gates,
The doors wide open fling;
Enter, ye nations that obey
The statutes of our King.

Here shall you taste unmingled joys,
And live in perfect peace,
You that have known Jehovah’s Name.
And ventured on His grace.

Trust in the Lord, forever trust,
And banish all your fears;
Strength in the Lord Jehovah dwells,
Eternal as His years.

What though the rebels dwell on high,
His arm shall bring them low;
Low as the caverns of the grave
Their lofty heads shall bow.

On Babylon our feet shall tread
In that rejoicing hour;
The ruins of her walls shall spread
A pavement for the poor.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_hurtful_was_the_choice_of_lot.php

How hurtful was the choice of Lot,
Who took up his abode
(Because it was a fruitful spot)
With them who feared not God!

A prisoner he was quickly made,
Bereaved of all his store;
And, but for Abraham’s timely aid,
He had returned no more.
Yet still he seemed resolved to stay
As if it were his rest;
Although their sins from day to day
His righteous soul distressed.

Awhile he stayed with anxious mind,
Exposed to scorn and strife;
At last he left his all behind,
And fled to save his life.

In vain his sons-in-law he warned,
They thought he told his dreams;
His daughters too, of them had learned,
And perished in the flames.

His wife escaped a little way,
But died for looking back:
Does not her case to pilgrims say,
“Beware of growing slack?"

Yea; Lot himself could ling’ring stand,
Though vengeance was in view;
’Twas mercy plucked him by the hand,
Or he had perished too.

The doom of Sodom wilt be ours
If to the earth we cleave;
Lord, quicken all our drowsy pow’rs,
To flee to Thee and live.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_i_love_they_law_o_lord.php

How I love Thy law, O Lord!
Daily joy its truths afford;
In its constant light I go,
Wise to conquer every foe.

Thy commandments in my heart,
Truest wisdom can impart;
To my eyes Thy precepts show
Wisdom more than sages know.

While my heart Thy Word obeys,
I am kept from evil ways;
From Thy law, with Thee to guide,
I have never turned aside.

Sweeter are Thy words to me
Than all other good can be;
Safe I walk, Thy truth my light,
Hating falsehood, loving right.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_joyful_tis_to_sing.php

How joyful 'tis to sing
To God enthroned on high,
To raise the ancient strain
Of tuneful psalmody
As choristers, who thus delight
To chant his praise by day and night!

Yet art is not enough,
Nor voice that charms the ear,
Unless the heart be tuned
And worship be sincere:
Help us to fix our minds on thee,
And lead us to simplicity.

Should we with wandering thoughts
Our minds allow to stray,
Nor heed God's holy word,
And, kneeling, fail to pray,
Help us to serve with godly fear,
Lest we forget thy presence near.

We seek to perfect praise
On earth, in hope that we
Some glimpses here may gain
Of heavenly harmony,
Where discord ne'er shall mar the tone
Of those that sing around thy throne.

Then in the praise of God
Let boys and men unite,
And, mindful of our trust,
Gird on our robes of white,
As symbol of the purity
That all must seek, who seek for thee.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_long_has_it_been.php

How long has it been, since you talked to the Lord,
And told Him your heart's hidden secrets?
How long since you prayed,
How long since you stayed,
On your knees 'til the light shone through? 
How long has it been since your mind felt at ease,
How long since your heart knew no burden?
Can you call Him your friend,
How long has it been,
Since you knew that He cared for you? 

How long has it been since you knelt by your bed,
And prayed to the Lord up in Heaven?
How long since you knew,
That He'd answer you,
And would keep you the long night through? 

How long has it been since you woke with the dawn,
And felt that the day's worth the living?
Can you call Him your friend,
How long has it been,
Since you knew that He cared for you? 

How long has it been since you talked with the Lord,
And told Him your heart's hidden secrets?
How long since you prayed,
How long since you stayed,
On your knees 'til the light shone through? 

How long has it been since you woke with the dawn,
And felt that the days' worth the living?
Can you call Him your friend?
How long has it been,
Since you knew that He cared for you?

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_long_must_we_wait.php

Long have we sought eternal life,
Years have we waited in sin and strife;
In darkness groped, sad misery’s mate,
How long? how long must we wait?

Refrain

How long? how long must we wait?
How long? how long must we wait?
The lab’rers still are few;
Our Lord has need of you,
How long? how long must we wait?

You know the love of God manifold,
Ages have bro’t you their grace untold;
Peace and a hope, no fear of fate.
How long? how long must we wait?

Refrain

The aged faint and long for the Friend,
Dark shadows gathering bring the end;
Fades now the light, ’tis growing late.
How long? how long must we wait?

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_long_o_lord_shall_i_complain.php

How long, O Lord, shall I complain,
Like one that seeks his God in vain?
Canst Thou Thy face for ever hide
And I still pray, and be denied?

Shall I for ever be forgot,
As one whom Thou regardest not?
Still shall my soul Thine absence mourn,
And still despair of Thy return?

How long shall my poor troubled breast
Be with these anxious thoughts oppressed?
And Satan, my malicious foe,
Rejoice to see me sunk so low?

Hear, Lord, and grant me quick relief,
Before my death conclude my grief:
If Thou withhold Thy heav’nly light,
I sleep in everlasting night.

How will the powers of darkness boast
If but one praying soul be lost!
But I have trusted in Thy grace,
And shall again behold Thy face.

Whate’er my fears or foes suggest,
Thou art my hope, my joy, my rest;
My heart shall feel Thy love, and raise
My cheerful voice to songs of praise.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_long_wilt_thou_conceal_thy_face.php

How long wilt Thou conceal Thy face?
My God, how long delay?
When shall I feel those heav’nly rays
That chase my fears away?

How long shall my poor laboring soul
Wrestle and toil in vain?
Thy word can all my foes control
And ease my raging pain.

See how the prince of darkness tries
All his malicious arts;
He spreads a mist around my eyes,
And throws his fiery darts.

Be Thou my sun, and Thou my shield,
My soul in safety keep;
Make haste, before mine eyes are sealed
In death’s eternal sleep.

How would the tempter boast aloud
If I become his prey!
Behold, the sons of hell grow proud
At Thy so long delay.

But they shall fly at Thy rebuke,
And Satan hide his head;
He knows the terrors of Thy look,
And hears Thy voice with dread.

Thou wilt display Thy sovereign grace,
Where all my hopes have hung,
I shall employ my lips in praise
And victory shall be sung.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_long_wilt_thou_forget_me.php

How long wilt Thou forget me,
O Lord, Thou God of grace?
How long shall fears beset me
While darkness hides Thy face?
How long shall griefs distress me
And turn my day to night?
How long shall foes oppress me
And triumph in their might?

O Lord my God, behold me
And hear mine earnest cries;
Lest sleep of death enfold me,
Enlighten Thou mine eyes;
Lest now my foe insulting
Should boast of his success,
And enemies exulting
Rejoice in my distress.

But I with expectation
Have on Thy grace relied;
My heart in Thy salvation
Shall still with joy confide;
And I with voice of singing
Will praise the Lord above,
Who, richest bounties bringing,
Has dealt with me in love.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_long_wilt_thou_forget_me_lord.php

How long wilt Thou forget me, Lord?
Shall it for ever be?
O how long shall it be that Thou
Wilt hide Thy face from me?

How long take counsel in my soul,
Still sad in heart, shall I?
How long exalted over me
Shall be mine enemy?

O Lord my God, consider well,
And answer to me make:
Mine eyes enlighten, lest the sleep
Of death me overtake:

Lest that mine enemy should say,
Against him I prevailed;
And those that trouble me rejoice,
When I am moved and failed.

But I have all my confidence
Thy mercy set upon;
My heart within me shall rejoice
In Thy salvation.

I will unto the Lord my God
Sing praises cheerfully,
Because He hath His bounty shown
To me abundantly.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_lost_was_my_condition.php

How lost was my condition

Till Jesus made me whole!
There is but one physician
Can cure a sin-sick soul
Next door to death he found me,
And snatched me from the grave,
To tell all around me
His wond'rous pow'r to save.

The worst of all diseases
Is light compared with sin;
On ev'ry part it seizes,
But rages most within;
'Tis palsy, plague, and fever,
And madness--all combined;
And none, but a believer,
The least relief can find.

From men, great skill professing,
I sought a cure to gain;
But this proved more distressing,
And added to my pain;
Some said that nothing ailed me,
Some gave me up for lost;
Thus ev'ry refuge failed me,
And all my hopes were crossed.

At length this great Physician,
How matchless is His grace!
Accepted my petition,
And undertook my case;
First, gave me sight to view him,
For sin my eyes had sealed--
Then bit me look unto Him;
I looked, and I was healed.

A dying, risen Jesus,
Seen by the eye of faith,
At once from danger frees us,
And saves the soul from death;
Come, then, to this Physician,
His help he'll freely give,
He makes no hard condition--
To Jesus look and live!
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_lovely_are_they_dwellings_fair.php

How lovely are Thy dwellings fair,
O Lord of hosts; how dear
The pleasant tabernacles are
Where Thou dost dwell so near!

Happy, who in Thy house reside,
Where Thee they ever praise!
Happy, whose strength in Thee doth bide,
And in their hearts Thy ways!

They journey on from strength to strength
With joy and gladsome cheer,
Till all before our God at length
In Zion doth appear.

Lord God of hosts that reign’st on high,
That man is truly blest
Who only on Thee doth rely,
And in Thee only rest.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_lovely_are_thy_tents_o_lord.php

How lovely are Thy tents, O Lord!
Where’er Thou choosest to record
Thy Name, or place Thy house of prayer;
My soul outflies the angel choir,
And faints, o’erpowered with strong desire,
To meet Thy special presence there.

My heart and flesh cry out for God;
There would I fix my soul’s abode,
As birds that in the altars nest;
There would I all my young ones bring,
An offering to my God and King,
And in Thy courts for ever rest.

Happy the men to whom ’tis given,
To dwell within that gate of Heaven,
And in Thy house record Thy praise;
Whose strength and confidence Thou art,
Who feel Thee, Savior, in their heart,
The Way, the Truth, the Life of grace:

Who, passing through the mournful vale,
Drink comfort from the living well,
That flows replenished from above;
From strength to strength advancing here,
Till all before their God appear,
And each receives the crown of love.

Better a day Thy courts within
Than thousands in the tents of sin;
How base the noblest pleasure there!
How great the weakest child of Thine!
His meanest task is all divine,
And kings and priests Thy servants are.

The Lord protects and cheers His own,
Their light and strength, their shield and sun;
He shall both grace and glory give;
Unlimited His bounteous grant;
No real good they e’er shall want;
All, all is theirs, who righteous live.

O Lord of hosts, how blest is he
Who steadfastly believes in Thee!
He all Thy promises shall gain;
The soul that on Thy love is cast
Thy perfect love on earth shall taste,
And soon with Thee in glory reign.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_lovely_is_thy_dwelling_place.php

How lovely is Thy dwelling place,
O Lord of hosts to me!
The tabernacles of Thy grace
How pleasant, Lord, they be!

My thirsty soul longs ardently,
Yes, faints Thy courts to see;
My very heart and flesh cry out,
O living God, for Thee.

Behold the sparrow findeth out
A house wherein to rest;
The swallow also, for herself,
Provided hath a nest.

Ee’n Thine own altars, where she safe
Her young ones forth may bring,
O Thou, almighty Lord of hosts,
Who art my God and King.

Blest are they in Thy house that dwell,
They ever give Thee praise,
Blest is the man whose strength Thou art,
In whose heart are Thy ways.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_lovely_on_the_mountain.php

How lovely on the mountain,
The feet of those who bring
Glad tidings of salvation,
Thro’ Zion’s glorious King;
Behold, of God anointed,
He comes with pow’r and might,
O regions veiled in darkness,
To pour celestial light.

Lift up thy head, O captive,
And let thy mournings cease;
The hand of mercy waveth
The olive branch of peace.
Lift up thy head, O captive,
For thou, in Christ, shalt find,
A healing balm of comfort,
The broken heart to bind.

O every one that thirsteth
The crystal water see;
To all who will receive it,
The fount of life is free.
Let every one who heareth
Obey the gracious call;
Come, without price, or money,
The Lord has paid for all.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_lovely_on_the_mountains.php

OUR GOD REIGNS © 1974, 1978 Leonard E. Smith, New Jerusalem Music, PO Box 225, 
Clarksboro, NJ 08020 (609) 423-8844. Used by permission.

How lovely on the mountains are the feet of Him
Who brings good news, good news;
Announcing peace, proclaiming news of happiness:
Our God reigns, our God reigns!

Refrain

Our God reigns!
Our God reigns!
Our God reigns!
Our God reigns!

He had no stately form, He had no majesty
That we should be drawn to Him.
He was despised and we took no account of Him.
Our God reigns, our God reigns!

Refrain

It was our sin and guilt that bruised and wounded Him.
It was our sin that brought Him down.
When we like sheep had gone astray our Shepherd came
And on His shoulders bore our shame.

Refrain

Meek as a lamb that’s led out to the slaughterhouse,
Dumb as a sheep before its shearer,
His life ran down upon the ground like pouring rain
That we might be born again.

Refrain

Out from the tomb He came with grace and majesty;
He is alive, He is alive.
God loves us so, see here His hands, His feet, His side
Yes we know, He is alive.

Refrain
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_lovely_shines_the_morning_star.php

How lovely shines the Morning Star!
The nations see and hail afar
The light in Judah shining.
Thou David’s Son of Jacob’s race,
My Bridegroom and my King of Grace,
For Thee my heart is pining.
Lowly, holy, great and glorious,
Thou victorious Prince of graces,
Filling all the heav’nly places.

O highest joy by mortals won,
True Son of God and Mary’s Son,
Thou highborn King of ages!
Thou art my heart’s most beauteous Flower,
And Thy blest Gospel’s saving power
My raptured soul engages.
Thou mine, I Thine; sing hosanna!
Heav’nly manna tasting, eating,
Whilst Thy love in songs repeating.

Now richly to my waiting heart,
O Thou, my God, deign to impart
The grace of love undying.
In Thy blest body let me be,
E’en as the branch is in the tree,
Thy life my life supplying.
Sighing, crying, for the savor
Of Thy favor; resting never
Till I rest in Thee forever.

A pledge of peace from God I see
When Thy pure eyes are turned to me
To show me Thy good pleasure.
Jesus, Thy Spirit and Thy Word,
Thy body and Thy blood afford
My soul its dearest treasure.
Keep me kindly in Thy favor,
O my Savior! Thou wilt cheer me;
Thy Word calls me to draw near Thee.

Thou, mighty Father, in Thy Son
Didst love me ere Thou hadst begun
This ancient world’s foundation.
Thy Son hath made a friend of me,
And when in spirit Him I see,
I joy in tribulation!
What bliss is this! He that liveth
To me giveth life forever;
Nothing me from Him can sever.

Lift up the voice and strike the string,
Let all glad sounds of music ring
In God’s high praises blended.
Christ will be with me all the way,
Today, tomorrow, every day,
Till traveling days be ended.
Sing out, ring out, triumph glorious,
O victorious, chosen nation;
Praise the God of your salvation.

Oh, joy to know that Thou, my Friend,
Art Lord, Beginning without end,
The First and Last, eternal!
And Thou at length—O glorious grace!—
Wilt take me to that holy place,
The home of joys supernal.
Amen, Amen! Come and meet me!
Quickly greet me! With deep yearning
Lord, I look for Thy returning.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_lovely_is_thy_dwelling_place.php

How lovely is Thy dwelling place,
O Lord of hosts to me!
The tabernacles of Thy grace
How pleasant, Lord, they be!

My thirsty soul longs ardently,
Yes, faints Thy courts to see;
My very heart and flesh cry out,
O living God, for Thee.

Behold the sparrow findeth out
A house wherein to rest;
The swallow also, for herself,
Provided hath a nest.

Ee’n Thine own altars, where she safe
Her young ones forth may bring,
O Thou, almighty Lord of hosts,
Who art my God and King.

Blest are they in Thy house that dwell,
They ever give Thee praise,
Blest is the man whose strength Thou art,
In whose heart are Thy ways.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_lovely_how_divinely_sweet.php

How lovely, how divinely sweet,
Oh Lord! Thy sacred courts appear;
Fain would my longing passions meet
The glories of Thy presence there.

O bless’d the men, bless’d their employ,
Whom Thy indulgent favors raise
To dwell in those abodes of joy,
And sing Thy never ceasing praise.

Happy the men whom strength divine
With ardent love and zeal inspires;
Whose steps to Thy blest way incline
With willing hearts and warm desires.

One day within Thy sacred gate,
Affords more real joy to me
Than thousands in the tents of state;
The meanest place is bliss with Thee.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_marvelous_gods_greatness.php

How marvelous God’s greatness, how glorious His might!
To this the world bears witness in wonders day and night.
In form of flower and snowflake, in morn’s resplendent birth,
In afterglow at even, in sky and sea and earth.

Each tiny floweret whispers the great life-giver’s Name;
The mighty mountain masses His majesty proclaim;
The hollow vales are hymning God’s shelter for His own;
The snow-capped peaks are pointing to God’s almighty throne.

The ocean’s vast abysses in one grand psalm record
The deep mysterious counsels and mercies of the Lord;
The icy waves of winter are thundering on the strand,
E’en grief’s chill stream is guided by God’s all-gracious hand.

The starry hosts are singing through all the light-strewn sky
Of God’s majestic temple and palace courts on high;
When in these outer chambers such glory gilds the night,
What the transcendent brightness of God’s eternal light!
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_oft_alas_this_wretched_heart.php

1. How oft, alas, this wretched heart
Has wandered from the Lord!
How oft my roving thoughts depart,
Forgetful of his word!

2. Yet sov'reign mercy calls, "Return!"
Dear Lord, and may I come?
My vile ingratitude I mourn;
O take the wand'rer home!

3. And canst thou, wilt thou yet forgive,
And bid my crimes remove?
And shall a pardoned rebel live,
To speak thy wondrous love?

4. Almighty grace, thy healing pow'r,
How glorious, how divine!
That can to life and bliss restore
So vile a heart as mine!

5. Thy pard'ning love, so free, so sweet
Dear Savior, I adore;
O keep me at thy sacred feet,
And let me rove no more!
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_oft_in_holy_converse.php

How oft in holy converse
With Christ, my Lord, alone,
I seem to hear the millions
That sing around His throne:

Refrain

Hallelujah! Amen!
Hallelujah! Amen!
Hallelujah! Amen!
Amen! Amen!

They passed through toils and trials,
And though the strife was long,
They share the victor’s conquest
And sing the victor’s song:

Refrain

My soul takes up the chorus
And, pressing on my way,
Communing still with Jesus,
I sing from day to day:

Refrain

Through grace I soon shall conquer
And reach my home on high;
And through eternal ages
I’ll shout beyond the sky:

Refrain
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_oft_we_are_there.php

We sing of a land where the servants of God
Shall meet when their journey is o’er,
And clasp their glad hands as they gather at morn,
To labor and sorrow no more.

Refrain

We sing of the beautiful mansions of rest
Our Savior has gone to prepare;
And oh, when we think of the bliss they unfold,
In spirit, how oft we are there.

We sing of a land where the leaves never fall,
A land where their bloom never dies;
And Jesus Himself, with His own loving hand,
Will wipe every tear from our eyes.

Refrain

We sing of the palms that the conquerors wave,
Who triumphed through Jesus our Lord;
Who fought to the last, and with shouts on their tongues,
Went home to receive their reward.

Refrain

We sing of the friends who are waiting today
For us in that region so fair;
But who can describe what a joy it will be
To know that indeed we are there?

Refrain

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_oft_o_lord_they_face_hath_shone.php

How oft, O Lord, Thy face hath shone
On doubting souls whose wills were true!
Thou Christ of Cephas and of John,
Thou art the Christ of Thomas, too. 

He loved Thee well, and calmly said
“Come, let us go, and die with Him";
Yet when Thine Easter news was spread,
’Mid all its light his eyes were dim.

His brethren’s word he would not take
But craved to touch those hands of Thine:
The bruisèd reed Thou didst not break;
He saw, and hailed his Lord divine.

He saw Thee ris’n; at once he rose
To full belief’s unclouded height;
And still through his confession flows
To Christian souls Thy life and light.

O Savior, make Thy presence known
To all who doubt Thy Word and Thee;
And teach them in that Word alone
To find the truth that sets them free.

And we who know how true Thou art,
And Thee as God and Lord adore,
Give us, we pray, a loyal heart,
To trust and love Thee more and more.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_pleasant_how_divinely_fair.php

How pleasant, how divinely fair,
O Lord of hosts, Thy dwellings are!
With long desire my spirit faints
To meet th’assemblies of Thy saints.

My flesh would rest in Thine abode,
My panting heart cries out for God;
My God! my King! why should I be
So far from all my joys and Thee?

The sparrow chooses where to rest
And for her young provides her nest;
But will my God to sparrows grant
That pleasure which His children want?

Bless’d are the saints who sit on high
Around Thy throne of majesty;
Thy brightest glories shine above,
And all their work is praise and love.

Bless’d are the souls who find a place
Within the temple of Thy grace;
There they behold Thy gentler rays,
And seek Thy face, and learn Thy praise.

Bless’d are the men whose hearts are set
To find the way to Sion’s gate;
God is their strength, and through the road
They lean upon their helper God.

Cheerful they walk with growing strength,
Till all shall meet in Heav’n at length,
Till all before Thy face appear,
And join in a nobler worship there.

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_pleased_and_blest_was_i.php

How pleased and blest was I
To hear the people cry,
“Come, let us seek our God today!"
Yes, with a cheerful zeal
We haste to Zion’s hill,
And there our vows and honors pay.

Zion, thrice happy place,
Adorned with wondrous grace,
And walls of strength embrace thee round;
In thee our tribes appear
To pray, and praise, and hear
The sacred Gospel’s joyful sound.

There David’s greater Son
Has fixed His royal throne,
He sits for grace and judgment there:
He bids the saint be glad,
He makes the sinner sad,
And humble souls rejoice with fear.

May peace attend thy gate,
And joy within thee wait
To bless the soul of every guest!
The man that seeks thy peace,
And wishes thine increase,
A thousand blessings on him rest!

My tongue repeats her vows,
“Peace to this sacred house!"
For there my friends and kindred dwell;
And since my glorious God
Makes thee His blest abode,
My soul shall ever love thee well.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_precious_is_the_book_divine.php

How precious is the book divine,
By inspiration giv’n;
Bright as a lamp its pages shine
To guide our souls to Heav’n.
Its light descending from above,
Our gloomy world to cheer,
Displays a Savior’s boundless love,
And brings His glories near.

Refrain

Oh precious book of light and life
Thou source of truth and love,
In Thee we view God’s matchless grace,
And all His goodness prove,
Oh precious book whose light e’er shines
With bright and cheering ray,
To guide our souls until the dawn
Of the eternal day.

It shows to man his wand’ring ways,
And where his feet have trod;
And brings to view the matchless grace
Of a forgiving God.
O’er all the straight and narrow way
Its radiant beams are cast;
A light whose never weary ray
Grows brightest at the last.

Refrain

It sweetly cheers our fainting hearts
In this dark vale of tears;
Life, light and joy it still imparts,
And quells our rising fears.
This lamp, through all the tedious night
Of life, shall guide our way,
Till we behold the clearer light
Of an eternal day.

Refrainhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_precious_lord_they_sacred_word.php

How precious, Lord, Thy sacred Word,
What light and joy those leaves afford
To souls in deep distress!
Thy precepts guide our doubtful way,
Thy fear forbids our feet to stray,
Thy promise leads to rest.

Thy threat’nings wake our slum’bring eyes,
And warn us where our danger lies;
But ’tis Thy Gospel, Lord,
That makes the guilty conscience clean,
Converts the soul, and conquers sin,
And gives a free reward.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_rich_thy_bounty_king_of_kings.php

How rich Thy bounty, King of kings!
Thy favors, how divine!
The blessings which Thy Gospel brings,
How splendidly they shine!

Gold is but dross, and gems but toys,
Should gold and gems compare;
How mean, when sent against those joys
Thy poorest servants share!

Yet all these treasures of Thy grace
Are lodged in urns of clay;
And the weak sons of mortal race
The immortal gifts convey.

Feebly they lisp Thy glories forth,
Yet grace the victory gives;
Quickly they molder back to earth,
Yet still Thy Gospel lives.

Such wonders power divine effects;
Such trophies God can raise;
His hand, from crumbling dust, erects
His monuments of praise.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_sad_our_state_by_nature_is.php

How sad our state by nature is!
Our sin, how deep it stains!
And Satan binds our captive souls
Fast in his slavish chains.

But hark! a voice of sovereign grace
Sounds from the sacred Word;
“Ho, ye despairing sinners, come,
And trust upon the Lord!"

My soul obeys the Almighty’s call,
And runs to this relief;
I would believe Thy promise, Lord;
O help my unbelief!

To the blest fountain of Thy blood,
Incarnate God, I fly;
Here let me wash my spotted soul
From sins of deepest dye.

Stretch out Thine arm, victorious King,
My reigning sins subdue,
Drive the old Dragon from his seat,
With all his hellish crew.

A guilty, weak, and helpless worm,
Into Thy hands I fall;
Be Thou my strength and righteousness,
My Savior, and my all.

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_shall_i_follow_him_i_serve.php

How shall I follow Him I serve?
How shall I copy Him I love?
Not from the blessèd footsteps swerve,
Which lead me to His seat above?

Privations, sorrows, bitter scorn,
The life of toil, the mean abode,
The faithless kiss, the crown of thorn,
Are these the consecrated road?

’Twas thus He suffered, though a Son,
Foreknowing, choosing, feeling all,
Until the perfect work was done,
And drunk the bitter cup of gall.

Lord, should my path through suffering lie
Forbid it I should e’er repine;
Still let me turn to Calvary,
Nor heed my griefs, remembering Thine.

O let me think how Thou didst leave
Untasted every pure delight,
To fast, to faint, to watch, to grieve,
The toilsome day, the homeless night.

To faint, to grieve, to die for me!
Thou camest, not Thyself to please;
And, dear as earthly comforts be,
Shall I not love Thee more than these?

Yes, I would count them all but loss,
To gain the notice of Thine eye:
Flesh shrinks and trembles at the cross,
But Thou canst give the victory.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_shall_i_my_savior_set_forth.php

1. How Shall I My Savior Set Forth?
How shall I His beauties declare?
Or how shall I speak of His worth,
Or what His chief dignities are?
His angels can never express,
Nor saints who sit nearest His throne,
How rich are His treasures of grace,
No! This is a myst'ry unknown.

2. In Him all the fullness of God
Forever transcendently shines;
Though one like a mortal he stood,
To finish His gracious designs;
Though once He was nailed to the cross,
Vile rebels like me to set free,
His glory sustained no loss,
Eternal His kingdom shall be.

3. His wisdom, His love, and His pow'r
Seemed then with each other to vie,
When sinners he stooped to restore,
Poor sinners condemned to die!
He laid all His grandeur aside,
And dwelt in a cottage of clay;
Poor sinners he loved till he died,
To wash their pollution away.

4. O sinners believe and adore
This Savior so rich to redeem;
No creature can ever explore
The treasures of goodness in Him.
Come, all ye who see yourselves lost,
And feel yourselves burdened with sin,
Draw near, while with terror you're tossed,
Believe, and your peace shall begin.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_shall_i_sing_that_majesty.php

How shall I sing that Majesty
Which angels do admire?
Let dust in dust and silence lie;
Sing, sing, ye heavenly choir.
Thousands of thousands stand around
Thy throne, O God most high;
Ten thousand times ten thousand sound
Thy praise; but who am I?

Thy brightness unto them appears,
Whilst I Thy footsteps trace;
A sound of God comes to my ears,
But they behold Thy face.
They sing because Thou art their Sun;
Lord, send a beam on me;
For where heaven is but once begun
There alleluias be.

Enlighten with faith’s light my heart,
Inflame it with love’s fire;
Then shall I sing and bear a part
With that celestial choir.
I shall, I fear, be dark and cold,
With all my fire and light;
Yet when Thou dost accept their gold,
Lord, treasure up my mite.

How great a being, Lord, is Thine,
Which doth all beings keep!
Thy knowledge is the only line
To sound so vast a deep.
Thou art a sea without a shore,
A sun without a sphere;
Thy time is now and evermore,
Thy place is everywhere.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_shall_the_young_direct_their_way.php

How shall the young direct their way?
What light shall be their perfect guide?
Thy Word, O Lord, will safely lead,
If in its wisdom they confide.
Sincerely I have sought Thee, Lord,
O let me not from Thee depart;
To know Thy will and keep from sin
Thy Word I cherish in my heart.

O blessèd Lord, teach me Thy law,
Thy righteous judgments I declare;
Thy testimonies make me glad,
For they are wealth beyond compare.
Upon Thy precepts and Thy ways
My heart will meditate with awe;
Thy Word shall be my chief delight,
And I will not forget Thy law.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_shall_the_young_secure_their_hearts.php

How shall the young secure their hearts
And guard their lives from sin?
Thy Word the choicest rules imparts
To keep the conscience clean.

When once it enters to the mind,
It spreads such light abroad,
The meanest souls instruction find,
And raise their thoughts to God.

’Tis, like the sun, a heav’nly light
That guides us all the day,
And through the dangers of the night
A lamp to lead our way.

The men that keep Thy law with care,
And meditate Thy Word,
Grow wiser than their teachers are,
And better know the Lord.

Thy precepts make me truly wise:
I hate the sinner’s road;
I hate my own vain thoughts that rise,
But love Thy law, my God.

The starry heav’ns Thy rule obey,
The earth maintains her place;
And these Thy servants, night and day,
Thy skill and power express.

But still Thy law and Gospel, Lord,
Have lessons more divine;
Not earth stands firmer than Thy Word,
Nor stars so nobly shine.

Thy Word is everlasting truth;
How pure is every page!
That holy Book shall guide our youth
And well support our age.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_shall_we_answer_terrors_cry.php

HOW SHALL WE ANSWER TERROR’S CRY? © 2001 Richard W. Adams. These lyr­ics may be 
free­ly re­pro­duced or pub­lished for Christ­ian wor­ship, pro­vid­ed they are 
not al­tered, and this no­tice is on each co­py. All other rights re­served.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

How shall we answer terror’s cry,
The cunning blade, the flaming sky?
When murderous spite knocks down our door
And violence breaks upon our shore,
O let us come and look to You
To know Your will—what shall we do?

When Satan whispers, “Hate your foe,
Now take your vengeance—draw the bow,"
Protect us from the tempter’s guile,
The lying voice, the evil smile.
O let us come in trust to You,
To hear the word we know is true.

When executioners hung You high
You turned Your prayer up to the sky,
And pled the Father to forgive,
You asked that cruel men might live.
O let us Your example take,
And pray for sinners as we ache.

We pray that You their hearts will turn;
And light a holy fire to burn
Their dross away, so they may be
Like gold refined, eternally.
O let us pray that they become,
Like us, with You forever one.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_strong_and_sweet_my_fathers_care.php

How strong and sweet my Father’s care,
That round about me, like the air,
Is with me always, everywhere!
He cares for me!

The thought great wonder with it brings,
My cares are all such little things,
But to the truth my glad heart clings,
He cares for me!

O keep me ever in Thy love,
Dear Father, watching from above,
And as through life my steps shall move,
O care for me.

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_sweet_and_awesome_is_this_place.php

How sweet and awesome is this place
[originally How sweet and aweful is the place]
With Christ within the doors,
While everlasting love displays
The choicest of her stores!

Here every bowel of our God
With soft compassion rolls;
Here peace and pardon bought with blood
Is food for dying souls.

While all our hearts and all our songs
Join to admire the feast,
Each of us cry, with thankful tongues,
“Lord, why was I a guest?

“Why was I made to hear Thy voice,
And enter while there’s room,
When thousands make a wretched choice,
And rather starve than come?"

’Twas the same love that spread the feast
That sweetly drew us in;
Else we had still refused to taste,
And perished in our sin.

Pity the nations, O our God!
Constrain the earth to come;
Send Thy victorious Word abroad,
And bring the strangers home.

We long to see Thy churches full,
That all the chosen race
May with one voice, and heart and soul,
Sing Thy redeeming grace.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_sweet_and_silent_is_the_place.php

How sweet and silent is the place,
My God, alone, with Thee!
Awaiting here Thy touch of grace,
Thy heav’nly mystery.

So many ways Thou hast, dear Lord,
My longing heart to fill:
Thy lovely world, Thy spoken word,
The doing Thy sweet will.

Giving Thy children living bread,
Leading Thy weak ones on,
The touch of dear hands on my head,
The thought of loved ones gone.

Lead me by many paths, dear Lord,
But always in Thy way;
And let me make my earth a Heav’n
Till next communion day.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_sweet_and_silent_is_the_place.php

How sweet and silent is the place,
My God, alone, with Thee!
Awaiting here Thy touch of grace,
Thy heav’nly mystery.

So many ways Thou hast, dear Lord,
My longing heart to fill:
Thy lovely world, Thy spoken word,
The doing Thy sweet will.

Giving Thy children living bread,
Leading Thy weak ones on,
The touch of dear hands on my head,
The thought of loved ones gone.

Lead me by many paths, dear Lord,
But always in Thy way;
And let me make my earth a Heav’n
Till next communion day.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_sweet_is_my_rest.php

How sweet is the comfort and rest of my soul,
Where peace doth so tranquilly flow;
Though storm-cloud and tempest and dark billows roll,
All my heart with His sunlight doth glow. 

Refrain:
How sweet is my rest! And how richly I’m blest!
Oh, how sweet is the rest of my soul! 

No fears shall alarm me though Satan be nigh,
He’s subject to Jesus’ control;
Though tempted and tried, Christ regardeth my cry,
Truly He is the joy of my soul. 

My sins all are gone, oh, what rapture to know
They’re nailed to the cross where He died;
The blood doth atone and my heart doth o’erflow,
Praise the Lord for the soul-cleansing tide! 

I’m saved even now, and though death soon may come,
No harm shall it bring to my soul;
For all it can do is to carry me home,
To be safe while the ages shall roll.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_sweet_is_my_walk_with_jesus.php

How sweet is my walk with Jesus!
What blessings He breathes on me!
We walk in the golden morning—
And, oh, how my soul is free!—
And onward together journey,
As swiftly the moments fly;
I sing of His love at evening,
As twilight illumes the sky. 

Refrain:
Oh, sweet is my walk with Jesus!
How gently He smiles on me!
Yet, nearer, my Lord so precious,
Oh, help me to walk with Thee. 

How sweet is my walk with Jesus!
His whispers of peace I hear;
His banner of love is o’er us,
And angels are hov’ring near;
I walk in the light with Jesus,
He shines in the narrow way;
The shadows of sin are vanished,
I walk in the light of day. 

How sweet is my walk with Jesus!
I love all the way He trod;
Embraced in His sweet communion,
I’ll walk with the Son of God;
I turn from the paths of pleasure,
And closer to Jesus press;
I’ll walk with my dear Redeemer,
In His perfect holiness. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_sweet_is_the_love_of_my_savior.php

How sweet is the love of my Savior!
’Tis boundless and deep as the sea;
And best of it all, it is daily
Growing sweeter and sweeter to me.

Refrain

Sweeter and sweeter to me,
Dearer and dearer each day;
Oh, wonderful love of my Savior,
Growing dearer each step of my way!

I know He is ever beside me!
Eternity only will prove
The height and the depth of His mercy,
And the breadth of His infinite love.

Refrain

Wherever He leads I will follow,
Thru sorrow, or shadow or sun;
And though I be tried in the furnace,
I can say, “Lord, Thy will be it done."

Refrain

Some day face to face I shall see Him,
And oh, what a joy it will be
To know that His love, now so precious,
Will forever grow sweeter to me!

Refrain
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_sweet_the_hour.php

How sweet the hour of praise and prayer,
When our devotions blend,
And on the wings of faith divine
Our songs of joy ascend!
’Tis then we hear in tones more clear
The gracious promise giv’n,
That, though we part from friends on earth,
We all shall meet in Heav’n.

Refrain

We all shall meet in Heav’n at last,
We all shall meet in Heav’n;
Through faith in Jesus’ precious blood,
We all shall meet in Heav’n.

How sweet the tie of hallowed love
That binds our hearts in one;
When gathered in the blessèd Name
Of Christ, the Father’s Son!
And though the parting soon may come,
Yet in His Word is giv’n
The blessèd hope that by and by
We all shall meet in Heav’n.

Refrain

Yes, soon our worn and weary feet
Will reach the golden strand,
Where those we love our coming wait
In yonder summerland;
A few more days, a few more years,
By storm and tempest driv’n,
With songs and everlasting joy
We all shall meet in Heav’n.

Refrain

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_sweet_the_hour_of_closing_day.php

How sweet the hour of closing day,
When all is peaceful and serene,
And when the sun, with cloudless ray,
Sheds mellow luster o’er the scene!

Such is the Christian’s parting hour;
So peacefully he sinks to rest,
When faith, endued from Heav’n with power, 
Sustains and cheers his languid breast.

Mark but that radiance of his eye,
That smile upon his wasted cheek;
They tell us of his glory nigh,
In language that no tongue can speak.

A beam from Heav’n is sent to cheer
The pilgrim on his gloomy road;
And angels are attending near,
To bear him to their bright abode.

Who would not wish to die like those
Whom God’s own Spirit deigns to bless?
To sink into that soft repose,
Then wake to perfect happiness?
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_sweet_the_name_of_jesus_sounds.php

How sweet the Name of Jesus sounds
In a believer’s ear!
It soothes his sorrows, heals his wounds,
And drives away his fear.

It makes the wounded spirit whole,
And calms the troubled breast;
’Tis manna to the hungry soul,
And to the weary, rest.

Dear Name, the Rock on which I build,
My Shield and Hiding Place,
My never failing treasury, filled
With boundless stores of grace!

By Thee my prayers acceptance gain,
Although with sin defiled;
Satan accuses me in vain,
And I am owned a child.

Jesus! my Shepherd, Husband, Friend,
O Prophet, Priest and King,
My Lord, my Life, my Way, my End,
Accept the praise I bring.

Weak is the effort of my heart,
And cold my warmest thought;
But when I see Thee as Thou art,
I’ll praise Thee as I ought.

Till then I would Thy love proclaim
With every fleeting breath,
And may the music of Thy Name
Refresh my soul in death!
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_sweet_to_reflect_on_the_joys_that_await_me.php

How sweet to reflect on the joys that await me
In yon blissful region, the haven of rest
Where glorified spirits in raptures will greet me.
And lead me to mansions prepared for the blessed.

Encircled with light and with glory enshrouded.
My happiness perfect, my mind's eye above
I'll bathe in the ocean of mercies unbounded
And range with delight through the Eden of love.

While angelic legions with harps tuned celestial
Harmoniously join in the concert of praise.
Any saints as they flock from the region terrestrial
In loud hallelujahs their voices shall raise.

This song of redemption is echoed in heaven
My soul would respond in Immanuel's love
"All glory, all honor, all might and dominion
To him who brought us to the Eden of love."

Then hail, blessed state, hail, ye songsters of glory
Ye harpers of bliss, soon I'll meet you above.
To join your full choir in rehearsing the story
Salvation from sorrow through Jesus' love.

Through prisoned on earth, yet by anticipation
Already my soul tastes the sweets from my Love.
Of joys that await me when freed from this station
My heart's now in heaven, the Eden of Love.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_sweet_how_heavenly_is_the_sight.php

How sweet, how heavenly is the sight,
When those that love the Lord
In one another’s peace delight,
And so fulfill His Word!

When each can feel his brother’s sigh
And with him bear a part!
When sorrow flows from eye to eye,
And joy from heart to heart!

When, free from envy, scorn, and pride,
Our wishes all above,
Each can his brother’s failings hide,
And show a brother’s love!

When love, in one delightful stream,
Through every bosom flows,
When union sweet, and dear esteem,
In every action glows.

Love is the golden chain that binds
The happy souls above;
And he’s an heir of Heaven who finds
His bosom glow with love.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_sweetly_flow_the_gospels_sound.php

How sweetly flowed the Gospel’s sound
From lips of gentleness and grace
While listening thousands gathered round,
And joy and gladness filled the place!

From Heaven He came, of Heaven He spoke,
To Heaven He led His followers’ way;
Dark clouds of gloomy night He broke,
Unveiling an immortal day.

“Come, wanderers, to My Father’s home;
Come, all ye weary ones, and rest."
Yes, sacred Teacher, we will come,
Obey Thee, love Thee, and be blest.

Decay, then, tenements of dust!
Pillars of earthly pride, decay!
A nobler mansion waits the just,
And Jesus has prepared the way.

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_sweetly_ore_the_mountain_of_zion.php

How sweetly o’er the mountain of Zion, lovely Zion,
The anthem of ages comes sweeping along;
The anthem of the faithful, we hear, and, rejoicing,
Our hearts in glad measure keep tune with the song.

Refrain

O the Lion of Judah hath triumphed forever,
O the Lion of Judah is mighty and strong.

O happy, happy tidings, the kingdom now is opened,
The seals are all broken; proclaim it afar;
From bondage and oppression by Him we are delivered,
The Lion of Judah, the bright Morning Star.

Refrain

Hosanna in the highest, all glory everlasting,
The cross and its banner triumphant shall wave;
Hosanna in the highest, all glory everlasting,
The Lion of Judah His people will save.

Refrain
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_tedious_and_tasteless.php



How tedious and tasteless the hours
When Jesus I no longer see;
Sweet prospects, sweet birds and sweet flowers,
Have all lost their sweetness to me;
The midsummer sun shines but dim,
The fields strive in vain to look gay.
But when I am happy in Him,
December’s as pleasant as May.

His Name yields the richest perfume,
And sweeter than music His voice;
His presence disperses my gloom,
And makes all within me rejoice.
I should, were He always thus nigh,
Have nothing to wish or to fear;
No mortal as happy as I,
My summer would last all the year.

Content with beholding His face,
My all to His pleasure resigned,
No changes of season or place
Would make any change in my mind:
While blessed with a sense of His love,
A palace a toy would appear;
All prisons would palaces prove,
If Jesus would dwell with me there.

Dear Lord, if indeed I am Thine,
If Thou art my sun and my song,
Say, why do I languish and pine?
And why are my winters so long?
O drive these dark clouds from the sky,
Thy soul cheering presence restore;
Or take me to Thee up on high,
Where winter and clouds are no more.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_the_fire_fell.php



O I love to tell the blessèd story
Since the Lord sanctified me;
For my soul received a flood of glory
When the Lord sanctified me.

Refrain

O I never shall forget how the fire fell,
How the fire fell, how the fire fell.
O I never shall forget how the fire fell
When the Lord sanctified me.

All my doubts and fears are gone forever
Since the Lord sanctified me;
For His peace flowed o’er me like a river
When the Lord sanctified me.

Refrain

To the world no more my heart is turning
Since the Lord sanctified me;
For on me His Spirit fell with burning
When the Lord sanctified me.

Refrain

There’s a crown awaiting me in Heaven
Since the Lord sanctified me;
For a heart made clean to me was given
When the Lord sanctified me.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_the_lord_from_heaven_came.php

I love to hear the story how the Lord from Heaven came
And did not fear to visit men in all their sin and shame;
But touched the sick and made them well, the blind and they did see,
And said of little children, “Suffer them to come to Me."

I love to think of Jesus as my gentle Shepherd Lord
Who leads in heav’nly pastures those who love to hear His Word;
And when I am in sorrow, and sore trouble makes me fear,
I hear Him say: “Be not afraid, My child, for I am near!"

I love to speak to Him alone in words of song and prayer
In darkest night and roughest way, for He is with me there;
And so He guides me that each day I may not fail to see
The way to Heav’n, that where He is, there also may I be.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_to_reach_the_masses.php

How to reach the masses, men of every birth,
For an answer, Jesus gave the key:
“And I, if I be lifted up from the earth,
Will draw all men unto Me."

Refrain

Lift Him up, Lift Him up,
Still He speaks from eternity:
“And I, if I be lifted up from the earth,
Will draw all men unto Me."

Oh! the world is hungry for the Living Bread,
Lift the Savior up for them to see;
Trust Him, and do not doubt the words that He said,
“I’ll draw all men unto Me."

Refrain

Don’t exalt the preacher, don’t exalt the pew,
Preach the Gospel simple, full and free;
Prove Him and you will find that promise is true,
“I’ll draw all men unto Me."

Refrain

Lift Him up by living as a Christian ought,
Let the world in you the Savior see;
Then men will gladly follow Him Who once taught,
“I’ll draw all men unto Me."

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_vain_the_cruel_herods_fear.php

How vain the cruel Herod’s fear,
When told that Christ the King is near!
He takes not earthly realms away,
Who gives the realms that ne’er decay.

The Eastern sages saw from far
And followed on His guiding star;
By light their way to Light they trod,
And by their gifts confessed their God.

Within the Jordan’s sacred flood
The heavenly Lamb in meekness stood,
That He to Whom no sin was known,
Might cleanse His people from their own.

And oh, what miracle divine,
When water reddened into wine!
He spake the word, and forth it flowed
In streams that nature ne’er bestowed.

All glory, Jesu, be to Thee
For this Thy glad Epiphany:
Whom with the Father we adore
And Holy Ghost forevermore.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_vast_the_benefits_divine.php

How vast the benefits divine which we in Christ possess!
We are redeemed from guilt and shame and called to holiness.
But not for works which we have done, or shall hereafter do,
Hath God decreed on sinful men salvation to bestow.

The glory, Lord, from first to last, is due to Thee alone;
Aught to ourselves we dare not take, or rob Thee of Thy crown.
Our glorious Surety undertook to satisfy for man,
And grace was given us in Him before the world began.

This is Thy will, that in Thy love we ever should abide;
That earth and hell should not prevail to turn Thy Word aside.
Not one of all the chosen race but shall to Heav’n attain,
Partake on earth the purposed grace and then with Jesus reign.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_welcome_was_the_call.php

How welcome was the call,
And sweet the festal lay,
When Jesus deigned in Cana’s hall
To bless the marriage day!

And happy was the bride,
And glad the bridegroom’s heart,
For He Who tarried at their side
Bade grief and ill depart.

His gracious power divine
The water vessels knew;
And plenteous was the mystic wine
The wondering servants drew.

O Lord of life and love,
Come Thou again today;
And bring a blessing from above
That ne’er shall pass away.

O bless, as erst of old,
The bridegroom and the bride;
Bless with the holier stream that flowed
Forth from Thy piercèd side.

Before Thine altar throne
This mercy we implore;
As Thou dost knit them, Lord, in one,
So bless them evermore.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_wonderful_it_is_to_walk_with_God.php

How wonderful it is to walk with God
Along the road that holy men have trod;
How wonderful it is to hear Him say:
Fear not, have faith, ’tis I who lead the way!

How wonderful it is to talk with God
When cares sweep o’er my spirit like a flood;
How wonderful it is to hear His voice,
For when He speaks the desert lands rejoice!

How wonderful it is to praise my God,
Who comforts and protects me with His rod;
How wonderful to praise him every hour,
My heart attuned to sing His wondrous power!

How wonderful it is to fight for God,
And point poor sinners to the precious blood;
How wonderful it is to wield His sword
’Gainst sin, the enemy of Christ, my Lord!

How wonderful ’twill be to live with God
When I have crossed death’s deep and swelling flood;
How wonderful to see Him face to face
When I have fought the fight and won the race!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_wondrous_and_great_thy_works.php

How wondrous and great
Thy works, God of praise!
How just, King of saints,
And true are Thy ways!
O who shall not fear Thee,
And honor Thy Name?
Thou only art holy,
Thou only supreme.

To nations long dark
Thy light shall be shown;
Their worship and vows
Shall come to Thy throne:
Thy truth and Thy judgments
Shall spread all abroad,
Till earth’s every people
Confess Thee their God.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_wondrous_great.php

How wondrous and great
Thy works, God of praise!
How just, King of saints,
And true are Thy ways!
O who shall not fear Thee,
And honor Thy Name?
Thou only art holy,
Thou only supreme.

To nations long dark
Thy light shall be shown;
Their worship and vows
Shall come to Thy throne:
Thy truth and Thy judgments
Shall spread all abroad,
Till earth’s every people
Confess Thee their God.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_beauteous_on_the_mountains.php

How beauteous on the mountains
The feet of him that brings,
Like streams from living fountains,
Good tidings of good things;
That publishes salvation;
From error gives release
To every tribe and nation:
God’s reign of joy and peace.

Break forth in hymns of gladness,
O waste Jerusalem;
Let songs instead of sadness,
Thy jubilee proclaim;
The Lord, in strength victorious,
Upon thy foes has trod;
Behold, O earth, the glorious
Salvation of our God.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_beautiful.php

How beautiful, the hands that served the wine and the bread,
and the sons of the earth. 

How beautiful, the feet that walked the long dusty roads, and
the hill to the cross. 

How beautiful, how beautiful, how beautiful,
is the body of Christ. 

How beautiful, the heart that bled, that took all my sin and
bore it instead. 

How beautiful, the tender eyes that choose to forgive and
never despise. 

How beautiful, how beautiful, how beautiful, is the body of Christ. 

And as He laid down His life. We offer this sacrifice,
that we will live, just as He died. 

Willing to pay, to pay the price, willing to pay the price. 

How beautiful, the radiant bride, who waits for her Groom with
His light in her eyes. 

How beautiful, when humble hearts give the fruit of pure lives
so that others may live. 

How beautiful, how beautiful, how beautiful, is the body of Christ. 

How beautiful, the feet that bring the sound of good news, and
the love of the King. 

How beautiful, the hands that serve the wine and the bread,
and the sons of the earth. 

How beautiful, how beautiful, how beautiful, is the body of Christ.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_brightly_beams_the_morning_star.php

How brightly beams the Morning Star!
What sudden radiance from afar
Doth glad us with its shining,
Brightness of God that breaks our night
And fills the darkened souls with light
Who long for truth were pining!
Thy Word, Jesu, inly feeds us,
Rightly leads us, life bestowing;
Praise, oh praise such love o’erflowing.

Thou here my Comfort, there my Crown,
Thou King of Heav’n, who camest down
To dwell as man beside me;
My heart doth praise Thee o’er and o’er,
If Thou art mine I ask no more,
Be wealth or fame denied me;
Thee I seek now; none who proves Thee,
None who loves Thee finds Thee fail him;
Lord of life, Thy powers avail him!

Through Thee alone can I be blest,
Then deep be on my heart impressed
The love that Thou hast borne me;
So make it ready to fulfill
With burning zeal Thy holy will,
Though men may vex or scorn me;
Savior, let me never lose Thee,
For I choose Thee, thirst to know Thee;
All I am and have I owe Thee!

O God, our Father far above,
Thee too I praise for all the love
Thou in Thy Son dost give me!
In Him am I made one with Thee,
My Brother and my Friend is He;
Shall aught affright or grieve me?
He is Greatest, Best, and Highest,
Ever nighest to the weakest;
Fear no foes, if Him thou seekest!

O praise to Him who came to save,
Who conquered death and burst the grave;
Each day new praise resoundeth
To Him the Lamb who once was slain,
The Friend whom none shall trust in vain,
Whose grace for aye aboundeth;
Sing, ye heavens, tell the story
Of His glory, till His praises
Flood with light Earth’s darkest places.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_can_it_be.php

O Saviour, as my eyes behold
The wonders of Thy might untold,
The heav'ns in glorious light arrayed,
The vast creation Thou hast made—
And yet to think Thou lovest me—
My heart cries out, "How can it be?"

Refrain:
How can it be? How can it be?
That God should love a soul like me,
O how can it be?

As at the cross I humbly bow
And gaze upon Thy thorn-crowned brow,
And view the precious bleeding form
By cruel nails so bruised and torn,
Knowing Thy suff'ring was for me,
In grief I cry, "How can it be?"

How can it be? How can it be?
Was ever grace so full and free!
From heights of bliss to depths of woe
In loving kindness Thou didst go,
From sin and shame to rescue me—
O Love Divine, How can it be? 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_deep_the_fathers_love_for_us.php

How deep the Father's love for us, how vast beyond all measure
That he should give his only son, to make a wretch his treasure
How great the pain of searing loss, the Father turned his face away
As wounds which mar the chosen one, bring many sons to glory

Behold the man upon a cross, my sin upon his shoulders
Ashamed, I hear my mocking voice call out among the scoffers
It was my sin that held him there until it was accomplished
His dying breath has brought me life; I know that it is finished

I will not boast in anything: no gifts, no power, no wisdom
But I will boast in Jesus Christ; his death and resurrection
Why should I gain from his reward? I cannot give an answer
But this I know with all my heart: his wounds have paid my ransom

© 1995 Kingsway's Thankyou Music
CCLI #1596342
Album: I Could Sing of Your Love Forever 2

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/how_long_has_it_been.php

How long has it been, since you talked to the Lord,
And told Him your heart's hidden secrets?
How long since you prayed,
How long since you stayed,
On your knees 'til the light shone through? 
How long has it been since your mind felt at ease,
How long since your heart knew no burden?
Can you call Him your friend,
How long has it been,
Since you knew that He cared for you? 

How long has it been since you knelt by your bed,
And prayed to the Lord up in Heaven?
How long since you knew,
That He'd answer you,
And would keep you the long night through? 

How long has it been since you woke with the dawn,
And felt that the day's worth the living?
Can you call Him your friend,
How long has it been,
Since you knew that He cared for you? 

How long has it been since you talked with the Lord,
And told Him your heart's hidden secrets?
How long since you prayed,
How long since you stayed,
On your knees 'til the light shone through? 

How long has it been since you woke with the dawn,
And felt that the days' worth the living?
Can you call Him your friend?
How long has it been,
Since you knew that He cared for you?

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/humble_souls_who_seek_salvation.php

1. Humble Souls, Who Seek Salvation
Through the Lamb's redeeming blood,
Hear the voice of revelation,
Tread the path that Jesus trod;
Flee to Him your only Savior,
In His mighty name confide;
In the whole of your behavior,
Own Hum as your sov'reign guide.

2. Hear the bless'd Redeemer call you,
Listen to His gracious voice;
Dread no ills that can befall you
While you make His way your choice;
Jesus says, "Let each believer
Be baptized in my name;"
He Himself in Jordan's river
Was immersed beneath the stream.

3. Plainly here His footsteps tracing,
Follow Him without delay;
Gladly His command embracing,
Lo! Your Captain leads the way.
View the rite with understanding,
Jesus' grave before you lies;
Be interred at His commanding
After His example rise.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/humble_thyself_in_the_sight_of_the_lord.php

Humble thyself in the sight of the Lord;

Humble thyself in the sight of the Lord.

And He (And He) shall lift (shall lift)

You up (higher and higher)

And He (And He) shall lift (shall lift) you up.



Humble thyself in the sight of the Lord;

Humble thyself in the sight of the Lord.

And He (And He) shall lift (shall lift)

You up (higher and higher)

And He (And He) shall lift (shall lift) you up.

And He (And He) shall lift (shall lift)

You up (up into heaven)

And He (And He) shall lift (shall lift) you up

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/humble_thyself_to_walk.php

If thou wouldst have the dear Savior from heaven
Walk by thy side from the morn till the even,
There is a rule that each day you must follow:
Humble thyself to walk with God. 

Refrain:
Humble thyself and the Lord will draw near thee,
Humble thyself and His presence shall cheer thee;
He will not walk with the proud or the scornful,
Humble thyself to walk with God. 

Just as the Lord, in the world’s early ages,
Walked and communed with the prophets and sages,
He will come now if you meet the conditions:
Humble thyself to walk with God. 

Just as the stream finds a bed that is lowly,
So Jesus walks with the pure and the holy;
Cast out thy pride, and in heartfelt contrition
Humble thyself to walk with God. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/humble_yourself.php

Chorus:
Humble yourself in the sight of the Lord (Humble yourself in the sight of the 
Lord)
Humble yourself in the sight of the Lord (Humble yourself in the sight of the 
Lord)
And He (and He) will lift (will lift) you up
And He (and He) will lift (will lift) you up
Jesus is the son of God (Jesus is the son of God)
Jesus is the son of God (Jesus is the son of God)
He died (He died) to set (to set) me free
He died (He died) to set (to set) me free

Amazing grace how sweet the sound (amazing grace how sweet the sound)
Amazing grace how sweet the sound (amazing grace how sweet the sound)
That saved (that saved) a wretch (a wretch) like me
That saved (that saved) a wretch (a wretch) like me

I once was lost but now I'm found (I once was lost but now I'm found)
I once was lost but now I'm found (I once was lost but now I'm found)
I was blind (was blind) but now (but now) I see
I was blind (was blind) but now (but now) I see

When we've been there ten-thousand years (When we've been there ten-thousand 
years)
When we've been there ten-thousand years (When we've been there ten-thousand 
years)
Bright shi- (bright shi-) 'ning as ('ning as) the sun
Bright shi- (bright shi-) 'ning as ('ning as) the sun

Repeat Chorus

(Up to the heavens)
And He (and He) will lift (will lift) you up (gonna see Jesus)
And He (and He) will lift (will lift) you up

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/humbly1.php

I've a request to make if I could dear Lord
It makes me ache to see the way we quarrel
We've got so much to do
We've got to tell the world about you (we've got to tell the world)
And if you could only see us through tomorrow

Chorus:
We've got brothers fighting brothers
And sisters who don't even talk
I know it's not the way You planned our walk together here
We've got to help each other or we're never gonna make it there
I'm begging You please (begging You please), on my knees (on my knees)
Humbly

We're fighting over little things, it's doing nobody good
Why can't we stop judging one another
It comes down to love
And being more like You
So that we can all be one and love each other

Bridge:
Jesus wept over Jerusalem and I'm crying out today
I don't what else I can do but pray

Repeat Chorus

While we fight amongst ourselves the whole world goes by (keeps passing by)
And most of them don't know the name of Jesus (Jesus)
It's got to start with you
And it's got to start with me
I'm begging you please
Humbly

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/humility.php

Humility, thou secret vale,
Unknown to proud in heart;

Where show’rs of blessing never fail,
And glories ne’er depart. 

Refrain:
Oh, make thy blest abode with me,
Thou angel of the sky;
If I may ever dwell with thee,
My soul shall never die. 

Humility, how pure thy place!
Thou seat of holiness!
Thou door of entrance into grace
And everlasting bliss! 

Humility, how calm the breast
That knows thy peace sublime!
Within thy courts our perfect rest
Grows sweeter all the time. 

Humility, thou shoreless sea
Of perfect love so deep!
Thy crystal waters cover me,
My helpless soul to keep. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/humility_of_heart.php

There is a grace few mortals find,
A star all heaven loves to see;
It is a meek and lowly mind,
The gem of pure humility. 

Refrain:
No ornament on earth so rare,
No jewel in all heaven’s mart,
Can beautify a soul so fair
As deep humility of heart. 

O God, hath e’er Thy balance weighed
A jewel of such priceless worth
As that pure life all humbly laid
Before the blessed Lord of earth? 

Within my hidden man, dear Lord,
That glorious ornament bestow,
The sweetest gift in all Thy Word—
O Father, keep me meek and low. 

All earthly crowns shall turn to mold,
All glitt’ring pride and vanity;
But meekness decks the soul with gold
That shines through all eternity. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hungry_and_faint_and_poor.php

Hungry, and faint, and poor,
Behold us, Lord again
Assembled at thy mercy's door,
Thy bounty to obtain.

Thy word invites us nigh,
Or we must starve indeed;
For we no money have to buy,
No righteousness to plead.

The food our spirit want,
Thy hand alone can give;
O, hear the prayer of faith, and grant
That we may eat and live.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/huron_carol.php

’Twas in the moon of wintertime,
When all the birds had fled,
That mighty Gitchi Manitou
Sent angel choirs instead;
Before their light the stars grew dim,
And wondering hunters heard the hymn:

Refrain

Jesus your King is born,
Jesus is born,
In excelsis gloria.

Within a lodge of broken bark
The tender babe was found,
A ragged robe of rabbit skin
Enwrapped His beauty round;
But as the hunter braves drew nigh,
The angel song rang loud and high:

Refrain

The earliest moon of wintertime
Is not so round and fair
As was the ring of glory on
The helpless Infant there.
The chiefs from far before Him knelt
With gifts of fox and beaver pelt.

Refrain

O children of the forest free,
O seed of Manitou,
The holy Child of earth and Heav’n
Is born today for you.
Come kneel before the radiant Boy,
Who brings you beauty, peace and joy.

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hurry_and_tell_him.php

“Ask, and it shall be given you," brother,
He is the Lord, who careth for all;
Come with your heart all broken and bleeding,
Come, He will hear and answer your call. 

Refrain:
Hurry and tell Him, brother and sister;
Jesus, so tender, loving and kind,
Waiting to comfort, bless and deliver;
Hurry and tell Him, peace you will find. 

Hurry and tell Him, why do you tarry?
Open your heart while Jesus is near;
Bring Him the burdens you cannot carry,
Tell Him with courage, nothing to fear. 

Hurry and tell what tongue cannot utter,
Groaning and sighing, loaded with care;
Bruised and weak with doubting, you falter;
Tell Him, He waits your burdens to bear. 

Hurry and tell Him every affliction,
Tell Him each pain and sorrow of heart;
Here is the word, “All power is given";
“Lo, I am with you," never to part. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hurry_home.php

I was playing tag outside with some kids down the street
Didn’t notice it was getting dark; heard her call for me

Chorus 1:
Hurry home, I’ve been waiting here for you
Hurry home, there’s so much we’ve got to do
The light is on, the table’s set, and I’ve been worried half to death
Waiting here for you so hurry home

Years later I went off to school, I couldn’t wait to leave
Missing home when I called her up, here’s what she said to me

Repeat Chorus 1

Got the call, it was almost noon, they said you’d better run
Her body had just given out, she asked to see her son
As I stood there silently, stroked her hair and felt her leave
Thought I could here my momma plead

Chorus 2:
Hurry home, I’ve been waiting here for you
Hurry home, there’s so much we’ve got to do
The light is on, the table’s set, don't be worried 'bout my death
I'll be waiting here for you so hurry home

The light is on, the table’s set, don't be worried about death
I'll be waiting here when you get home
I'll be waiting here when you get home

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hush_my_babe.php

1. Hush, my babe, lie still and slumber,
Holy angels guard thy bed,
Heav’nly blessings without number,
Gently falling on they head.
How much better thou art attended,
Than the Son of God could be,
When from heaven He descended,
And became a child like thee!

2. Soft and easy is thy cradle,
Coarse and hard thy Savior lay:
When His birthplace was a stable,
And His softest bed was hay.
Oh, to tell the wondrous story,
How His foes abused their King;
How they killed the Lord of glory,
Makes me angry while I sing.

3. Hush, my child, I did not chide thee,
Though my song may seem so hard;
Tis thy mother sits beside thee,
And her arms shall be thy guard.
May'st thou learn to know and fear Him,
Love and serve Him all thy days;
Then to dwell forever near Him,
Tell His love and sing His praise.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hush_my_dear.php

Hush, my dear, lie still and slumber,
Holy angels guard thy bed,
Heav’nly blessings without number,
Gently falling on they head.
How much better thou’rt attended,
Than the Son of God could be,
When from Heaven He descended,
And became a child like thee!

Soft and easy is thy cradle,
Coarse and hard thy Savior lay:
When His birthplace was a stable,
And His softest bed was hay.
Oh, to tell the wondrous story,
How His foes abused their King;
How they killed the Lord of glory,
Makes me angry while I sing.

Hush, my child, I did not chide thee,
Though my song may seem so hard;
’Tis thy mother sits beside thee,
And her arms shall be thy guard.
May’st thou learn to know and fear Him,
Love and serve Him all thy days;
Then to dwell forever near Him,
Tell His love and sing His praise.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hush_blessed_are_the_dead.php

Hush! blessèd are the dead
In Jesus’ arms who rest,
And lean their weary head
Forever on His breast.

O beatific sight!
No darkling veil between,
They see the Light of Light,
Whom here they loved unseen.

Them the Good Shepherd leads,
Where storms are never rife,
In tranquil dewy meads
Beside the Fount of Life.

O tender hearts and true,
Our long last vigil kept,
We weep and mourn for you;
Nor blame us: Jesus wept.

But soon at break of day
His calm almighty voice,
Stronger than death, shall say,
Awake! Arise! Rejoice!
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hush_my_soul_what_voice_is_pleading.php

Hush, my soul, what voice is pleading?
Thou canst feel its silent power;
Who is this that speaks so gently
In this solemn evening hour?
“Stay, poor sinner; life is fleeting,
And thy soul is dark within;
Wilt thou wait till outer darkness
Close in gloom thy life of sin?"

Hark! it is a voice of sweetness,
Tenderly it speaks, and true!
Dark and sad, yet strangely yearning,
For a peace I never knew.
Half inclined to stay and listen,
Half inclined to go away;
Still I linger, for it whispers,
“Harden not thy heart today."

What is this that steals beside me?
Can it be that at my side,
In His own mysterious presence,
Stands the wondrous Crucified?
“Why poor sinner, wilt thou linger?
I am waiting to forgive;
See the meaning of these wound prints;
I have died that thou mayest live!"

Hush, my soul! It is thy Savior!
And He seeks His lost one now;
He is waiting, flee not from Him,
Venture near, before Him bow;
Tell Thy sins; He will forgive thee;
And He will not love thee less;
For the human heart of Jesus
Overflows with tenderness.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hush1.php

Chorus:
God is standing by
So hush, don't you worry
Don't cry
God is standing by
So hush, don't you worry
Don't cry 
Repeat Chorus 

And when troubles come
Don't cry, no don't cry
When all your dreams
And would be fortunes pass you by
And when there is heartache
So many trials and life's unclear
Just look up toward heaven
There's a God and He's standing near 

Repeat Chorus 

And when there is parting
All your friends and loved ones leave you
And you hurt so bad
You feel you just don't know what to do
And if you're wondering if there's anybody who
Really cares
Let me assure you, that there's a God
and He'll be right there 

Repeat Chorus (x2) 

So hush, don't you worry
Don't cry
Hush
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hush_my_little_loved_one.php

Hush my little loved one
It's time now to rest
Throughout the day you have given
Each task your best
You'll need strength to face tomorrow
Hush child, time now to rest
You'll need strength to face tomorrow
Hush child, time now to rest

While you are asleep God will watch over you
His guardian angels protecting
His Spirit will soothe
In the morning, when you awaken
We'll be close by your side
In the morning when you awaken
We'll be close by your side

(repeat first verse)

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hushed_was_the_evening_hymn.php

Hushed was the evening hymn,
The temple courts were dark;
The lamp was burning dim
Before the sacred ark;
When suddenly a voice divine
Rang through the silence of the shrine.

The old man, meek and mild,
The priest of Israel, slept;
His watch the temple child,
The little Levite, kept;
And what from Eli’s sense was sealed
The Lord to Hannah’s son revealed.

O give me Samuel’s ear,
The open ear, O Lord,
Alive and quick to hear
Each whisper of Thy Word,
Like him to answer at Thy call,
And to obey Thee first of all.

O give me Samuel’s heart,
A lowly heart, that waits
Where in Thy house Thou art,
Or watches at Thy gates;
By day and night, a heart that still
Moves at the breathing of Thy will.

O give me Samuel’s mind,
A sweet unmurm’ring faith,
Obedient and resigned
To Thee in life and death,
That I may read with child like eyes
Truths that are hidden from the wise.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hymn_of_promise.php

In the bulb there is a flower; in the seed, an apple tree;
In cocoons, a hidden promise: butterflies will soon be free!
In the cold and snow of winter there’s a spring that waits to be,
Unrevealed until its season, something God alone can see.

There’s a song in every silence, seeking word and melody;
There’s a dawn in every darkness, bringing hope to you and me.
From the past will come the future; what it holds, a mystery,
Unrevealed until its season, something God alone can see.

In our end is our beginning; in our time, infinity;
In our doubt there is believing; in our life, eternity,
In our death, a resurrection; at the last, a victory,
Unrevealed until its season, something God alone can see.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/hymn_to_a_gracious_sovereign.php

O God the deep immutable, the changeless, wise and still,
You’re the absolute, eternal One; You wield the sovereign will.
Deep Heav’n itself and even time must bend beneath your sway.
With a whispered thought you banish night in a flash of blinding day.

The seas are boundaried by your word; great mountains heed your call.
Majestic swirls of galaxies adorn your royal hall.
The centuries are lumps of clay shaped by your strength and skill.
You mold the long millennia to the dictates of your will.

The boundless, black-robed skies proclaim your vast, astonishing might:
Their flaming jewels rejoice for you in silent shouts of light.
With sure and sovereign strokes your hands finger the cosmic strings,
And play celestial symphonies as all creation sings.

And silent now, the angels stare; stunned seraphs blush, amazed;
Great Michael sheaths the sword that at the Gate of Eden blazed.
Mighty Gabriel sets his trump aside, and listens to his Lord,
As Love incomprehensible enfleshes the Living Word.

Now space and time have cracked before the size of this event:
The Godhead shudders as the glorious Son to Hell is sent.
Though Very God of Very God, He counts it all but loss,
And comes and suffers as a man, from the manger to the Cross.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_half_has_never_been_told.php

I know I love Thee better, Lord
Than any earthly joy,
For Thou hast given me the peace
Which nothing can destroy.

Refrain

The half has never yet been told,
Of love so full and free;
The half has never yet been told,
The blood—it cleanseth me.

I know that Thou art nearer still
Than any earthly throng.
And sweeter is the thought of Thee
Than any lovely song.

Refrain

Thou hast put gladness in my heart;
Then well may I be glad!
Without the secret of Thy love
I could not but be sad.

Refrain

O Savior, precious Savior mine!
What will Thy presence be
If such a life of joy can crown
Our walk on earth with Thee?

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_hallelujah_side.php

Once a sinner far from Jesus,
I was perishing with cold,
But the blessèd Savior heard me when I cried;
Then He threw His robe around me,
And He led me to His fold,
And I’m living on the hallelujah side.

Refrain

Oh, glory be to Jesus, let the hallelujahs roll;
Help me ring the Savior’s praises far and wide,
For I’ve opened up tow’rd heaven
All the windows of my soul,
And I’m living on the hallelujah side.

Tho’ the world may sweep around me
With her dazzle and her dreams,
Yet I envy not her vanities and pride,
For my soul looks up to heaven,
Where the golden sunlight gleams,
And I’m living on the hallelujah side.

Refrain

Not for all earth’s golden millions
Would I leave this precious place,
Tho’ the tempter to persuade me oft has tried,
For I’m safe in God’s pavilion,
Happy in His love and grace,
And I’m living on the hallelujah side.

Refrain

Here the sun is always shining,
Here the sky is always bright;
’Tis no place for gloomy Christians to abide,
For my soul is filled with music
And my heart with great delight,
And I’m living on the hallelujah side.

Refrain

And upon the streets of glory,
When we reach the other shore,
And have safely crossed the Jordan’s rolling tide,
You will find me shouting “Glory"
Just outside my mansion door
Where I’m living on the hallelujah side.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_hallowed_spot.php

There is a spot to me more dear
Than native vale or mountain;
A spot for which affection’s tear
Springs grateful from its fountain.
’Tis not where kindred souls abound,
Though that is almost Heaven,
But where I first my Savior found,
And felt my sins forgiven.

Hard was my toil to reach the shore,
Long tossed upon the ocean;
Above me was the thunder’s roar,
Beneath, the wave’s commotion.
Darkly the pall of night was thrown
Around me faint with terror;
In that dark hour how did my groan
Ascend for years of error.

Sinking and panting as for breath
I knew not help was near me;
I cried, “Oh, save me, Lord from death,
Immortal Jesus, hear me."
Then quick as thought I felt Him mine,
My Savior stood before me;
I saw His brightness round me shine,
And shouted “Glory, Glory."

O sacred hour! O hallowed spot!
Where love divine first found me;
Wherever falls my distant lot,
My heart shall linger round thee.
And when from earth I rise, to soar
Up to my home in Heaven,
Down will I cast my eyes once more,
Where I was first forgiven.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_hand_that_was_nailed_to_the_cross.php

The hand that was nailed to the cross of woe,
In love reaches out to the world below;
’Tis beckoning now to the souls that roam,
And pointing the way to the heav’nly home.

Refrain

The hand of my Savior I see,
The hand that was wounded for me;
’Twill lead me in love to the mansions above,
The hand that was wounded for me!

E’en now I can see, through a mist of tears,
That hand still outstretched o’er the gulf of years,
With healing and hope for my sin sick soul,
One touch of its finger will make me whole!

Refrain

The hand that wrought wonders in days of old,
Holds treasure more precious than gems or gold,
The price of redemption from sin and shame,
The gift of salvation through Jesus’ Name.

Refrain



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_handwriting_on_the_wall.php

At the feast of Belshazzar and a thousand of his lords,
While they drank from golden vessels, as the Book of Truth records,
In the night, as they reveled in the royal palace hall,
They were seized with consternation—’twas the Hand upon the wall!

Refrain

’Tis the hand of God on the wall!
’Tis the hand of God on the wall!
Shall the record be “Found wanting!"
Or shall it be “Found trusting!"
While that hand is writing on the wall?

See the brave captive, Daniel, as he stood before the throne,
And rebuked the haughty monarch for his mighty deeds of wrong;
As he read out the writing—’twas the doom of one and all,
For the kingdom now was finished—said the Hand upon the wall!

Refrain

See the faith, zeal and courage, that would dare to do the right,
Which the Spirit gave to Daniel—’twas the secret of his might,
In his home in Judea, or a captive in the hall,
He understood the writing of his God upon the wall!

Refrain

So our deeds are recorded—there’s a Hand that’s writing now:
Sinner, give your heart to Jesus, to His royal mandates bow;
For the day is approaching—it must come to one and all,
When the sinners’ condemnation will be written on the wall!

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_happy_christmas_comes_once_more.php

The happy Christmas comes once more,
The heavenly Guest is at the door,
The blessèd words the shepherds thrill,
The joyous tidings, “Peace, good will."

This world, though wide and far outspread,
Could scarcely find for You a bed.
Your cradle was a manger stall,
No pearl nor silk nor kingly hall.

O let us go with quiet mind,
The gentle Babe with shepherds find,
To gaze on Him Who gladdens them,
The loveliest flower of Jesse’s stem.

The lowly Savior meekly lies,
Laid off the splendor of the skies;
No crown bedecks His forehead fair,
No pearl, nor gem, nor silk is there.

O wake, our hearts, in gladness sing,
And keep our Christmas with our King,
Till living song, from loving souls,
Like sound of mighty water rolls.

O holy Child, Thy manger gleams
Till earth and heaven glow with its beams,
Till midnight noon’s broad light hath won,
And Jacob’s star outshines the sun.

Thou patriarchs’ joy, Thou prophets’ song,
Thou heavenly Dayspring, looked for long,
Thou Son of Man, incarnate Word,
Great David’s Son, great David’s Lord.

Come, Jesus, glorious heavenly Guest,
Keep Thine own Christmas in our breast,
Then David’s harp strings, hushed so long,
Shall swell our jubilee of song.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_happy_morn_is_come.php

The happy morn is come!
Triumphant o’er the grave,
The Lord hath left the tomb
Omnipotent to save.

Refrain

Captivity is captive led;
For Jesus liveth that was dead.

Who now accuseth them
For whom their Surety died?
Who now shall those condemn
Whom God hath justified?

Refrain

Christ hath the ransom paid;
The glorious work is done;
Oh Him our help is laid;
By Him our victory won.

Refrain

Hail, the triumphant Lord!
Thy resurrection Thou!
We bless Thy sacred Word;
Before Thy throne we bow.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_harbor_bell.php

Our life is like a stormy sea
Swept by the gales of sin and grief,
While on the windward and the lee
Hang heavy clouds of unbelief;
But o’er the deep a call we hear,
Like harbor bell’s inviting voice;
It tells the lost that hope is near,
And bids the trembling soul rejoice.

Refrain

This way, this way, O heart oppressed,
So long by storm and tempest driv’n;
This way, this way, lo here is rest,
Rings out the harbor bell of Heav’n.

Refrain

O let us now the call obey,
And steer our bark for yonder shore,
Where still that voice directs the way,
In pleading tones forevermore;
A thousand life wrecks strew the sea;
They’re going down at every swell;
“Come unto Me, come unto Me,"
Rings out th’ assuring harbor bell.

Refrain

O tempted one, look up, be strong;
The promise of the Lord is sure,
That they shall sing the victor’s song,
Who faithful to the end endure;
God’s Holy Spirit comes to thee,
Of His abiding love to tell;
To blissful port, o’er stormy sea,
Calls Heav’n’s inviting harbor bell.

Refrain

Come, gracious Lord, and in Thy love
Conduct us o’er life’s stormy wave;
O guide us to the home above,
The blissful home beyond the grave;
There safe from rock, and storm, and flood,
Our song of praise shall never cease,
To Him Who bought us with His blood,
And brought us to the port of peace.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_harp_at_natures_advent_strung.php

The harp at Nature’s advent strung
Has never ceased to play;
The song the stars of morning sung
Has never died away.

And prayer is made, and praise is giv’n,
By all things near and far;
The ocean looketh up to Heav’n,
And mirrors every star.

Its waves are kneeling on the strand,
As kneels the human knee,
Their white locks bowing to the sand,
The priesthood of the sea!

They pour their glittering treasures forth,
Their gifts of pearl they bring,
And all the listening hills of earth
Take up the song they sing.

The green earth sends its incense up
From many a mountain shrine;
From folded leaf and dewy cup
She pours her sacred wine.

The mists above the morning rills
Rise white as wings of prayer;
The altar-curtains of the hills
Are sunset’s purple air.

The winds with hymns of praise are loud,
Or low with sobs of pain—
The thunder-organ of the cloud,
The dropping tears of rain.

With drooping head and branches crossed
The twilight forest grieves,
Or speaks with tongues of Pentecost
From all its sunlit leaves.

The blue sky is the temple’s arch,
Its transept earth and air,
The music of its starry march
The chorus of a prayer.

So Nature keeps the reverent frame
With which her years began,
And all her signs and voices shame
The prayerless heart of man.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_haven_of_rest.php

My soul in sad exile was out on life’s sea,
So burdened with sin and distressed,
Till I heard a sweet voice, saying,
“Make Me your choice";
And I entered the “Haven of Rest"!

Refrain

I’ve anchored my soul in the “Haven of Rest,"
I’ll sail the wide seas no more;
The tempest may sweep over wild, stormy, deep,
In Jesus I’m safe evermore.

I yielded myself to His tender embrace,
In faith taking hold of the Word,
My fetters fell off, and I anchored my soul;
The “Haven of Rest" is my Lord.

Refrain

The song of my soul, since the Lord made me whole,
Has been the old story so blest,
Of Jesus, Who’ll save whosoever will have
A home in the “Haven of Rest."

Refrain

How precious the thought that we all may recline,
Like John, the belovèd so blest,
On Jesus’ strong arm, where no tempest can harm,
Secure in the “Haven of Rest."

Refrain

O come to the Savior, He patiently waits
To save by His power divine;
Come, anchor your soul in the “Haven of Rest,"
And say, “My Belovèd is mine."

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_head_that_once_was_crowned.php

The head that once was crowned with thorns
Is crowned with glory now;
A royal diadem adorns
The mighty victor’s brow. 

The highest place that Heav’n affords
Belongs to Him by right;
The King of kings and Lord of lords,
And Heaven’s eternal Light.

The joy of all who dwell above,
The joy of all below,
To whom He manifests His love,
And grants His Name to know.

To them the cross with all its shame,
With all its grace, is given;
Their name an everlasting name,
Their joy the joy of Heaven.

They suffer with their Lord below;
They reign with Him above;
Their profit and their joy to know
The mystery of His love.

The cross He bore is life and health,
Though shame and death to Him,
His people’s hope, His people’s wealth,
Their everlasting theme.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_healing_fountain.php

There’s a fountain flowing
From the Savior’s side;
Life and health bestowing,
Since for man He died.

And the Word declareth,
Bathing there is free;
Who is he that dareth
Hinder you and me?

Heav’nly balm it poureth
Into hearts that grieve;
Gladness it restoreth
When earth’s comforts leave.

Oft my heart was sinking
’Neath the load I bore;
Kneeling here, and drinking,
I was strong once more.

By its murm’ring waters
I lie down each night;
When my courage totters
I renews my might.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_healing_waters.php

Oh, the joy of sins forgiv’n,
Oh, the bliss the blood-washed know,
Oh, the peace akin to Heav’n,
Where the healing waters flow.

Refrain

Where the healing waters flow,
Where the joys celestial glow,
Oh, there’s peace and rest and love,
Where the healing waters flow!

Now with Jesus crucified,
At His feet I’m resting low;
Let me evermore abide
Where the healing waters flow.

Refrain

O, this precious, perfect love!
How it keeps the heart aglow,
Streaming from the fount above,
Where the healing waters flow.

Refrain

Oh, to lean on Jesus’ breast,
While the tempests come and go!
Here is blessèd peace and rest,
Where the healing waters flow.

Refrain

Cleansed from every sin and stain,
Whiter than the driven snow,
Now I sing my sweet refrain,
Where the healing waters flow.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_heavenly_voice.php

List to the Gospel resounding,
Beautiful message of love;
Jesus, in mercy abounding,
Calleth for you from above.

Refrain

List to the heavenly voice
Tenderly urging your choice;
Yield to the love of your Savior,
Listen, believe and rejoice.

Why not, O why not, repenting,
Turn from your perilous course,
Ending in woe unrelenting,
Anguish, disgrace and remorse?

Refrain

Life, like the dew of the morning,
Vanisheth quickly away;
Death bringeth sorrow and mourning,
Wailing forever and aye.

Refrain

Touched by the Spirit so tender,
Calling as ever before,
Willingly, freely surrender,
Open, yes, open your door.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_heavenly_word_proceeding_forth.php

The heavenly Word proceeding forth,
Yet leaving not the Father’s side,
Accomplishing His work on earth
Had reached at length life’s eventide.

By false disciple to be given
To foemen for His life athirst
Himself, the very Bread of Heav’n,
He gave to His disciples first.

He gave Himself in either kind,
His precious flesh, His precious blood,
In love’s own fullness thus designed
Of the whole man to be the Food.

By birth their fellow man was He;
Their Meat, when sitting at the board;
He died, their Ransomer to be;
He ever reigns, their great Reward.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_heavens_declare_they_glory_birks.php

The heavens declare Thy glory,
The firmament Thy power;
Day unto day the story
Repeats from hour to hour;
Night unto night replying,
Proclaims in every land,
O Lord, with voice undying,
The wonders of Thy hand.

The sun with royal splendor
Goes forth to chant Thy praise;
And moonbeams soft and tender
Their gentler anthem raise;
O’er every tribe and nation
That music strange is poured,
The song of all creation,
To Thee, creation’s Lord.

How perfect, just, and holy
The precepts Thou hast given;
Still making wise the lowly,
They lift the thoughts to heaven;
How pure, how soul restoring
Thy Gospel’s heavenly ray,
A brighter radiance pouring
Than noon of brightest day.

All heaven on high rejoices
To do its Maker’s will;
The stars with solemn voices
Resound Thy praises still;
So let my whole behavior,
Thoughts, words, and actions be,
O Lord, my Strength, my Savior,
One ceaseless song to Thee.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_heavens_declare_they_glory_watts.php

The heav’ns declare Thy glory, Lord,
In every star Thy wisdom shines
But when our eyes behold Thy Word,
We read Thy Name in fairer lines.

The rolling sun, the changing light,
And nights and days, Thy power confess
But the blest volume Thou hast writ
Reveals Thy justice and Thy grace.

Sun, moon, and stars convey Thy praise
Round the whole earth, and never stand:
So when Thy truth begun its race,
It touched and glanced on every land.

Nor shall Thy spreading Gospel rest
Till through the world Thy truth has run,
Till Christ has all the nations blest
That see the light or feel the sun.

Great Sun of Righteousness, arise,
Bless the dark world with heav’nly light;
Thy Gospel makes the simple wise,
Thy laws are pure, Thy judgments right.

Thy noblest wonders here we view
In souls renewed and sins forgiv’n;
Lord, cleanse my sins, my soul renew,
And make Thy Word my guide to Heaven.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_highest_and_the_holiest_place.php

The highest and the holiest place
Guards not the heart from sin;
The Church that safest seems without
May harbor foes within.

Thus in the small and chosen band,
Beloved above the rest,
One fell from his apostleship,
A traitor-soul unblest.

But not the great designs of God
Man’s sins shall over throw;
Another witness to the truth
Forth to the lands shall go.

The soul that sinneth, it shall die;
Thy purpose shall not fail;
The word of grace no less shall sound,
The truth no less prevail.

Righteous, O Lord, are all Thy ways;
Long as the worlds endure,
From foes without and foes within,
Thy Church shall stand secure.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_highest_joy.php

The highest joy that can be known
To those who heav’nward wend—
It is the Word of Life to own,
And God to have as Friend;
It is the Word of Life to own,
And God to have as Friend.

The Word doth give me wealth untold,
All good it has in store;
My deepest sorrows lose their hold
To joys forevermore;
My deepest sorrows loose their hold
To joys forevermore.

How often when in deep despair
My soul has been restored,
And when the tempter would ensnare
’Twould strength to stand afford;
And when the tempter would ensnare
’Twould strength to stand afford.

It tells me of a love divine,
How Jesus’ blood was shed;
Each day this joyous song is mine
As paths of grace I tread;
Each day this joyous song is mine
As paths of grace I tread.

When stars above shall shine no more
God’s Word is still my light;
When pleasures of this world are o’er,
My joys shall reach their height;
When pleasures of this world are o’er,
My joys shall reach their height.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_holly_and_ivy.php

The Holly and the Ivy
Now both are full well grown,
Of all the trees that are in the wood,
The Holly bears the crown.

Refrain

O the rising of the sun,
The running of the deer,
The playing of the merry organ,
Sweet singing in the quire,
Sweet singing in the quire.

The Holly bears a blossom,
As white as lily-flower;
And Mary bore sweet Jesus Christ,
To be our sweet Savior.

Refrain

The Holly bears a berry,
As red as any blood;
And Mary bore sweet Jesus Christ,
To do poor sinners good.

Refrain

The Holly bears a prickle,
As sharp as any thorn;
And Mary bore sweet Jesus Christ,
On Christmas Day in the morn.

Refrain

The Holly bears a bark,
As bitter as any gall;
And Mary bore sweet Jesus Christ,
For to redeem us all.

Refrain

The Holly and the Ivy
Now both are full well grown,
Of all the trees that are in the wood,
The Holly bears the crown.

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_holy_anthem.php

Alleluia! Alleluia!
Let the holy anthem rise,
And the choirs of heaven chant it
In the temple of the skies;
Let the mountains skip with gladness
And the joyful valleys ring,
With Hosannas in the highest
To our Savior and our King.

Alleluia! Alleluia!
Like the sun from out the wave,
He has risen up in triumph
From the darkness of the grave,
He’s the splendor of the nations,
He’s the lamp of endless day;
He’s the very Lord of glory
Who is risen up today.

Alleluia! Alleluia!
Blessèd Jesus make us rise,
From the life of this corruption
To the life that never dies.
May Your glory be our portion,
When the days of time are past,
And the dead shall be awakened
By the trumpet’s mighty blast.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_holy_city.php



Last night I lay a sleeping,

There came a dream so fair,
I stood in old Jerusalem
Beside the temple there.
I heard the children singing,
And ever as they sang,
Methought the voice of angels
From Heav’n in answer rang;
Methought the voice of angels
From Heav’n in answer rang:—
“Jerusalem! Jerusalem!
Lift up your gates and sing,
Hosanna in the highest
Hosanna to your King!"

And then methought my dream was chang’d,
The streets no longer rang,
Hush’d were the glad hosannas
The little children sang.
The sun grew dark with mystery,
The morn was cold and chill,
As the shadow of a cross arose
Upon a lonely hill,
As the shadow of a cross arose
Upon a lonely hill.
“Jerusalem! Jerusalem!
Hark! how the angels sing,
Hosanna in the highest,
Hosanna to your King."

And once again the scene was chang’d,
New earth there seem’d to be,
I saw the Holy City
Beside the tideless sea;
The light of God was on its streets,
The gates were open wide,
And all who would might enter,
And no one was denied.
No need of moon or stars by night,
Or sun to shine by day,
It was the new Jerusalem,
That would not pass away,
It was the new Jerusalem,
That would not pass away.
“Jerusalem! Jerusalem!
Sing, for the night is o’er!
Hosanna in the highest,
Hosanna for evermore!
Hosanna in the highest,
Hosanna for evermore!"
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_holy_ghost_is_here.php

The Holy Ghost is here,
Where saints in prayer agree,
As Jesus’ parting Gift is near
Each pleading company.

Not far away is He,
To be by prayer brought nigh,
But here in present majesty,
As in His courts on high.

He dwells within our soul,
An ever welcome Guest;
He reigns with absolute control,
As Monarch in the breast.

Obedient to Thy will,
We wait to feel Thy power;
O Lord of life, our hopes fulfill,
And bless this hallowed hour.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_holy_ghost_is_my_comforter.php

Holy Ghost, my Comforter,
Now from highest Heaven appear,
Shed Thy gracious radiance here.

Thou the heart’s most precious Guest,
Thou of comforters the best,
Give to us, o’erladen, rest.

Blessèd Sun of grace, o’er all
Faithful hearts who on Thee call
Let Thy light and solace fall.

What without Thy aid is wrought,
Skillful deed or wisest thought,
God will count but vain and naught.

Cleanse us, Lord, from sinful stain,
On the parchèd spirit rain,
Heal the wounded of its pain.

Bend the stubborn will to Thine,
Melt the cold with fire divine,
Erring hearts to right incline.

Grant us, Lord, who cry to Thee,
Steadfast in the faith to be,
Give Thy gift of charity.

May we live in holiness,
And in death find happiness,
And abide with Thee in bliss!


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_holy_son_of_god_most_high.php

The holy Son of God most high,
For love of Adam’s lapsèd race,
Quit the sweet pleasures of the sky
To bring us to that happy place.

His robes of light He laid aside,
Which did His majesty adorn,
And the frail state of mortals tried,
In human flesh and figure born.

Whole choirs of angels loudly sing
The mystery of His sacred birth,
And the blest news to shepherds bring,
Filling their watchful souls with mirth.

The Son of God thus man became,
That men the sons of God might be,
And by their second birth regain
A likeness to His deity.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_holy_spirit.php

The Spirit, oh, sinner,
In mercy doth move,
Thy heart, so long hardened,
Of sin to reprove;
Resist not the Spirit,
Nor longer delay;
God’s gracious entreaties,
May end with today.

Oh, child of the kingdom,
From sin service cease:
Be filled with the Spirit,
With comfort and peace.
Oh, grieve not the Spirit,
Thy Teacher is He,
That Jesus, Thy Savior,
May glorified be.

Defiled is the temple,
Its beauty laid low,
On God’s holy altar
The embers faint glow.
By love yet rekindled,
A flame may be fanned;
Oh, quench not the Spirit,
The Lord is at hand.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_home_over_there.php

O think of the home over there,
By the side of the river of light,
Where the saints, all immortal and fair,
Are robed in their garments of light.
Over there, over there,
O think of the home over there,
Over there, over there,
O think of the home over there.

O think of the friends over there,
Who before us the journey have trod,
Of the songs that they breathe on the air,
In their home in the palace of God.
Over there, over there,
O think of the friends over there,
Over there, over there,
O think of the friends over there.

My Savior is now over there,
There my kindred and friends are at rest,
Then away from my sorrow and care,
Let me fly to the land of the blest.
Over there, over there,
My Savior is now over there,
Over there, over there,
My Savior is now over there.

I’ll soon be at home over there,
For the end of my journey I see;
Many dear to my heart, over there,
Are watching and waiting for me.
Over there, over there,
I’ll soon be at home over there,
Over there, over there,
I’ll soon be at home over there.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_homeland_o_the_homeland.php

The Homeland! O the Homeland! The land of souls free born!
No gloomy night is known there, but only fadeless morn:
I’m sighing for that country, my heart is aching here;
There is no pain in the Homeland to which I’m drawing near.

My Lord is in the Homeland, with angels bright and fair;
No sinful thing nor evil, can ever enter there;
The music of the ransomed is ringing in my ears,
And when I think of the Homeland, my eyes are wet with tears.

For loved ones in the Homeland are waiting me to come,
Where neither death nor sorrow invades their holy home:
O dear, dear native country! O rest and peace above!
Christ bring us all to the Homeland, of His eternal love.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_hope_of_the_ages.php

Jesus comes, He comes in glory,
Echoes through the ages hoary
Blessèd hope and thrilling story,
Hallelujah! Jesus comes!

Refrain

Hope of all the ages past,
King of kings, He comes at last.
Up, ye saints of God awaking!
See the morning light is breaking!
Hallelujah! Jesus comes!

Jesus comes, the dead are waking,
Earth with mortal pangs is quaking;
Stars are falling, heavens shaking,
Hallelujah! Jesus comes!

Refrain

Jesus comes, in clouds descending,
Sins restraining, sorrow ending,
Broken ties forever mending,
Hallelujah! Jesus comes!

Refrain

Jesus comes, all things restoring,
Cry aloud, His grace imploring,
Bow the knee, the King adoring,
Hallelujah! Jesus comes!

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_hope_of_the_coming_of_the_lord.php

A lamp in the night, a song in time of sorrow;
A great glad hope which faith can ever borrow
To gild the passing day, with the glory of the morrow,
Is the hope of the coming of the Lord.

Refrain

Blessèd hope, blessèd hope,
Blessèd hope of the coming of the Lord;
How the aching heart it cheers,
How it glistens through our tears,
Blessèd hope of the coming of the Lord.

A star in the sky, a beacon bright to guide us;
An anchor sure to hold when storms betide us;
A refuge for the soul, where in quiet we may hide us,
Is the hope of the coming of the Lord.

Refrain

A call of command, like trumpet clearly sounding,
To make us bold when evil is surrounding;
To stir the sluggish heart and to keep in good abounding,
Is the hope of the coming of the Lord.

Refrain

A word from the One to all our hearts the dearest,
A parting word to make Him aye the nearest;
Of all His precious words, the sweetest, brightest, clearest,
Is the hope of the coming of the Lord.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_hour_glass.php

Alas! how swift the moments fly!
How flash the years along!
Scarce here, yet gone already by,
The burden of a song.
See childhood, youth, and manhood pass,
And age, with furrowed brow;
Time was—Time shall be—drain the glass—
But where in Time is now?

Time is the measure but of change;
No present hour is found;
The past, the future, fill the range
Of Time’s unceasing round.
Where, then is now? In realms above,
With God’s atoning Lamb,
In regions of eternal love,
Where sits enthroned I AM.

Then pilgrim, let thy joys and tears
On Time no longer lean;
But henceforth all thy hopes and fears
From earth’s affections wean:
To God let votive accents rise;
With truth, with virtue, live;
So all the bliss that Time denies
Eternity shall give.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_h/the_hymn_for_conquering_martyrs_raise.php

The hymn for conquering martyrs raise,
The victor innocents we praise,
Whom in their woe earth cast away,
But Heav’n with joy received today;
Whose angels see the Father’s face
World without end, and hymn His grace;
And while they chant unceasing lays,
The hymn for conquering martyrs raise.

A voice from Ramah was there sent,
A voice of weeping and lament,
When Rachel mourned the children’s care
Whom for the tyrant’s sword she bare.
Triumphal is their glory now,
Whom earthly torments could not bow,
What time, both far and near that went,
A voice from Ramah there was sent.

Fear not, O little flock and blest,
The lion that your life opprest!
To heavenly pastures ever new
The heavenly Shepherd leadeth you;
Who, dwelling now on Zion’s hill,
The Lamb’s dear footsteps follow still;
By tyrant there no more distrest,
Fear not, O little flock and blest.

And every tear is wiped away
By your dear Father’s hands for ay;
Death hath no power to hurt you more,
Whose own is life’s eternal store.
Who sow their seed, and sowing weep,
In everlasting joy shall reap,
What time they shine in heavenly day,
And every tear is wiped away.

O city blest o’er all the earth,
Who gloriest in the Savior’s birth,
Who are His earliest martyrs dear,
By kindred and by triumph here;
None from henceforth may call thee small,
Of rival towns thou passest all:
In whom our Monarch had His birth,
O city blest o’er all the earth!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_adore_thee.php


I adore thee, I adore thee,
glorious ere the world began;
yet more wonderful thou shinest,
though divine, yet still divinest
in thy dying love for man.

I adore thee, I adore thee,
thankful at thy feet to be;
I have heard thine accent thrilling,
Lord, I came, for thou art willing
me to pardon, even me.

I adore the, I adore thee,
born of woman, yet divine;
with thy Spirit, Lord, endue me,
in thine image pure renew me,
let me evermore be thine.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_a_child_of_the_king.php


Oh, how sublime is the life of the Christian,
Filled with the glory of Jesus divine;
Deep in his bosom he’s joyfully conscious
That he is born of a heavenly line. 

Refrain:
I am a child, a child of the King,
I am a child, a child of the King;
I am a prince in the kingdom of love,
I am a child of the King.

Once I was lost and a child of confusion,
Over the mountains of folly I roamed;
But at the cross I have entered the kingdom,
Glory to Jesus! His love is enthroned. 

God is my Father, and Jesus my Brother,
Since I’m adopted by heavenly love;
I am an heir in the kingdom of glory,
And have a crown that is waiting above.


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_a_poor_wayfaring_stranger.php


I am a poor wayfaring stranger,
While traveling through this world of woe.
Yet there痴 no sickness, toil nor danger
In that bright world to which I go.
I知 going there to see my Father;
I知 going there no more to roam.
Refrain

I知 only going over Jordan,
I知 only going over home.

I know dark clouds will gather round me;
I know my way is rough and steep.
But golden fields lie out before me
Where God痴 redeemed shall ever sleep.
I知 going there to see my mother,
She said she壇 meet me when I come.

Refrain

I値l soon be free from every trial,
My body sleep in the churchyard;
I値l drop the cross of self denial
And enter on my great reward.
I知 going there to see my Savior,
To sing His praise forevermore.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_a_stranger_here.php


I am a stranger here, within a foreign land;
My home is far away, upon a golden strand;
Ambassador to be of realms beyond the sea,
I’m here on business for my King.
Refrain

This is the message that I bring,
A message angels fain would sing:
“Oh, be ye reconciled,"
Thus saith my Lord and King,
“Oh, be ye reconciled to God."

This is the King’s command: that all men, everywhere,
Repent and turn away from sin’s seductive snare;
That all who will obey, with Him shall reign for aye,
And that’s my business for my King.

Refrain

My home is brighter far than Sharon’s rosy plain,
Eternal life and joy throughout its vast domain;
My Sovereign bids me tell how mortals there may dwell,
And that’s my business for my King.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_coming_home.php


Jesus, I am coming home today, for
I have found there’s joy in Thee alone;
From the path of sin I turn away; now
I am coming home.
Refrain

Jesus, I am coming home today,
Never, never more from Thee to stray;
Lord, I now accept Thy precious promise,
I am coming home.

Many years my heart has strayed from Thee, and
Now repentant to Thy throne I come;
Jesus opened up the way for me; now
I am coming home.

Refrain

O the misery my sin has caused me,
Naught but pain and sorrow I have known;
Now I seek Thy saving grace and mercy;
I am coming home.

Refrain

Fully trusting in Thy precious promise,
With no righteousness to call my own,
Pleading nothing but the blood of Jesus,
I am coming home.

Refrain

Now I seek the cross where Jesus died! For
All my sins His blood will still atone,
Flowing o’er till ev’ry stain is covered;
I am coming home.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_coming_to_the_cross.php


I am coming to the cross;

I am poor and weak and blind;
I am counting all but dross;
I shall full salvation find.

Refrain 1-4:
I am trusting, Lord, in Thee,
Blessed Lamb of Calvary;
Humbly at Thy cross I bow,
Save me, Jesus, save me now.

Long my heart has sighed to be
Wholly purified within;
Jesus sweetly speaks to me:
“I will cleanse you from all sin." 

Here I give my all to Thee:
Friends and time and earthly store;
Soul and body Thine to be,
Wholly Thine forevermore. 

In the promises I trust;
Now I feel the blood applied;
I am prostrate in the dust;
I with Christ am crucified. 

Jesus comes! He fills my soul!
Perfected in Him I am;
I am every whit made whole:
Glory, glory to the Lamb!


Refrain 5:
I am trusting, Lord, in Thee,
Blessed Lamb of Calvary;
Humbly at Thy cross I bow,
Jesus saves me, saves me now.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_coming_lord_to_thee.php


I am coming, Lord, to Thee with my broken heart;
I am coming, Lord, to Thee for rest;
Wilt Thou hear my humble plea, bid my sins depart?
Oh, release me, Savior, I知 oppressed. 

Refrain:
I am coming, Lord, to Thee, wilt Thou hear my humble plea?
I am coming with my heart oppressed;
I am coming, I am coming,
I am coming, Lord, to Thee for rest.

I am coming, Lord, to Thee with relenting will,
I will gladly lay my burden down;
I will consecrate to Thee and Thy law fulfill,
I will bear the cross, and wear a crown. 

I am coming, Lord, to Thee, and with anguish riv地,
I am weary, worn, and tired of sin;
Lord, I press my urgent plea, may I be forgiv地?
While I knock, O Savior, let me in. 

I am coming, Lord, to Thee with an aching breast,
And I know that Thou wilt hear my cry;
I will leave the paths of sin, for my heart痴 distressed,
Save me, or I perish, Lord, and die. 

I am coming, Lord, to Thee, for I知 sick and sore,
Do not turn from me Thy smiling face;
Lord, for mercy now I call, I will sin no more,
Wilt Thou hear and save me by Thy grace?
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_content.php


1. I am content! My Jesus liveth still,
In whom my heart is pleased.
He hath fulfilled the Law of God for me,
God's wrath He hath appeased.
Since He in death could perish never,
I also shall not die forever.
I am content! 

2. I am content! My Jesus is my Head;
His member I will be.
He bowed His head when on the cross He died
With cries of agony.
Now death is brought into subjection
For me, too, by His resurrection.
I am content! 

3. I am content! My Jesus is my Lord,
My Prince of Life and Peace;
His heart is yearning for my future bliss
And for my soul's release.
The home where He, my Master, liveth
He also to His servant giveth.
I am content! 

4. I am content! My Jesus is my Light,
My radiant Sun of Grace.
His cheering rays beam blessings forth for all,
Sweet comfort, hope, and peace.
This Easter sun doth bring salvation
And everlasting exultation.
I am content! 

5. I am content! Lord, draw me unto Thee
And wake me from the dead
That I may rise forevermore to be
With Thee, my living Head.
The fetters of my body sever,
Then shall my soul rejoice forever.
I am content! 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_dwelling_on_a_mountain.php


I am dwelling on a mountain
Where the golden sunlight gleams
In a land whose wondrous beauty
Far exceeds my fondest dreams

Is not this the land of Beulah
Blessed, blessed land of light
Where the flowers bloom forever
And the sun is always bright

I am drinking at the fountain
Where I ever would abide
For I've tasted life's pure river
And my soul is satisfied

There's no thirsting for life's treasure
Nor adorning rich and gay
For I've found a richer treasure
One that fadeth not away

For I've found a richer treasure
One that fadeth not away

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_free.php


You’ve buried my sins
In the depths of the sea
Carried my guilt far away
As far as the East is from the West
You removed my transgressions from me

So I’ll tell of Your mercy
Sing of Your grace
Walk in Your liberty
And I’ll live in the awesome
Light of Your love
’Cause I know that I am free!
’Cause I know that I am free!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_free_i_am_unlimited.php


I am free, I am unlimited,
There are no chains that bind me.
I am free, I am unlimited, Right now! Right now!

I am free, I am unlimited,
There are no chains that bind me.
I am free, I am unlimited, Right now! Right now!

We are free, we are unlimited,
There are no chains that bind us.
We are free, We are unlimited, Right now! Right now!

We are free, we are unlimited,
There are no chains that bind us.
We are free, We are unlimited, Right now! Right now!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_from_sin_set_free.php


Let worldly minds the world pursue,
It has no charms for me;
Once I admired its trifles, too,
But grace hath set me free. 

Refrain:
Free! free! free!
I am from sin set free!
This world has now no charms for me,
For Christ hath set me free.

Its pleasures can no longer please,
Nor happiness afford;
Far from my heart be joys like these,
Now, I have seen the Lord. 

As by the light of op’ning day,
The stars are all concealed;
So earthly pleasures fade away,
When Jesus is revealed. 

Creatures no more divide my choice,
I bid them all depart;
His name, His love, His gracious voice,
Have fixed my roving heart. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_glad_they_came_with_singing.php


I am glad they came with singing, I am glad, I am glad,
Came the blessed Savior bringing to his own.
I am glad the joyous throng as they moved with him along,
Raised their voices in hosannas sweet and strong.

Let us come with joy and singing. Let us come, the Savior bringing;
He is waiting to be welcomed here today.
Let him come in us to reign. And forever there remain.
Cast ing every doubt and every fear away. all away.

I am glad their hearts were singing, I am glad, I am glad,
As their grateful tho'ts were winging to the skies.
I am glad they honor gave with a loyal purpose brave
To the King who came a fallen world to save.

Let us come with joy and singing. Let us come, the Savior bringing;
He is waiting to be welcomed here today.
Let him come in us to reign. And forever there remain.
Cast ing every doubt and every fear away. all away.

I am glad his love is clinging. I am glad, I am glad,
To our happy chorus ringing thro' the air.
I am glad we may adore. as did they who went before.
Shouting "Blessed" and "Ho- san- na sanna" o'er and o'er.

Let us come with joy and singing. Let us come, the Savior bringing;
He is waiting to be welcomed here today.
Let him come in us to reign. And forever there remain.
Cast ing every doubt and every fear away. all away.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_going_to_a_city.php


I am going to a city
Where the roses never fade,
Here they bloom but for a season,
Soon their beauty is decayed;
Where the tree of life is blooming
And the roses never fade.

I am going to a city
Where the roses never fade,
Here they bloom but for a season,
Soon their beauty is decayed;
We'll be free from all temptations
Where the roses never fade.

I am going to a city
Where the roses never fade,
Loved ones gone to be with Jesus,
In their robes of white arrayed,
Now are waiting for my coming
Where the roses never fade. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_happy_in_him.php


My soul is so happy in Jesus,
For He is so precious to me;
His voice it is music to hear it,
His face it is heaven to see. 

Refrain:
I am happy in Him,
I am happy in Him;
My soul with delight
He fills day and night,
For I am happy in Him.

He sought me so long ere I knew Him,
When wand’ring afar from the fold;
Safe home in His arms He hath brought me,
To where there are pleasures untold. 

His love and His mercy surround me,
His grace like a river doth flow;
His Spirit, to guide and to comfort,
Is with me wherever I go. 

They say I shall some day be like Him,
My cross and my burden lay down;
Till then I will ever be faithful,
In gathering gems for His crown.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_happy_in_the_service_of_the_king.php


I am happy in the service of the King.
I am happy, O so happy!
I have peace and joy that nothing else can bring,
In the service of the King.
Refrain

In the service of the King
Every talent I will bring.
I have peace and joy and blessing
In the service of the King.

I am happy in the service of the King.
I am happy, O so happy!
Through the sunshine and the shadow I can sing,
In the service of the King.

Refrain

I am happy in the service of the King.
I am happy, O so happy!
To His guiding hand forever I will cling,
In the service of the King.

Refrain

I am happy in the service of the King.
I am happy, O so happy!
All that I possess to Him I gladly bring,
In the service of the King.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_healed.php


Though my faith was very weak,
Jesus said so sweet and kind,
“I will surely heal you every whit,
And will break the chains that bind." 

Then His proffered hand I took,
And the vict’ry soon was won,
I received the perfect healing touch,
And the work was quickly done. 

Praise His name forevermore!
I will tell to all around,
How the precious gift of healing pow’r,
Through the Spirit we have found. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_here_before_you.php


My Lord, I am here before You
Stretch out Your hands to me
My soul is completely lost
Forgive me for all my sins
I need Your salvation
My Lord, come closer to me
O my Lord, hear my prayer
Anoint my soul and my heart
I thank You, O Lord my God
Cause You have heard

My sincere cry
Guiding my steps
To the heavenly home
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_hiding.php


Safely hiding, should I fear,
When the Lord is near?
I am hiding, safely hiding
When the storm clouds fly,
I am hiding in His presence,
’Neath His watchful eye. 

Refrain:
I am hiding, hiding,
I am safely hiding,
Hiding till the billows pass me by;
I am hiding, hiding,
I am safely hiding,
Hiding when the tempests sweep the sky.

Safely hiding, I am sure
All is now secure,
Though the tide should overflow me
I am not afraid,
I am trusting in His keeping
In the cleft He made. 

Safely hiding in His grace,
What a resting-place!
I am in the Rock of Ages—
Should my courage fail?
There is not a dark foreboding
In the fiercest gale. 

Safely hiding, I am blest
While I sweetly rest,
Oh, what peace and calm assurance
Now abide within!
I am happy in endurance
Since I’m free from sin. 
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_his_and_he_is_mine.php


The waves are tossing, billows roll,
And storm clouds screen the sunny sky;
I’ll trust the Lover of my soul,
For I am safe when He is nigh.
He’ll carry me up, up, away—
Above the clouds the sun doth shine;
In His dear arms of love I’ll lay,
For I am His and He is mine. 

I cannot see the way before;
Through desert wastes or by the sea—
Whatever He may have in store,
I’ll drink the cup He giveth me.
I’ll lowly let Him have His way
To purge all dross and gold refine;
In His dear arms of love I’ll lay,
For I am His and He is mine. 

Let nothing ever come to cool
My love for Him who loveth me;
Let nothing blight the bliss but fuel
The flame to burn away debris.
Let nothing turn my feet astray,
Nor strain the ties that intertwine;
In His dear arms of love I’ll lay,
For I am His and He is mine.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_his_child.php


My heavenly Father is caring for me,
My bark He is guiding o’er life’s raging sea;
Though storms overshadow, and billows are wild,
They cannot o’erwhelm me, for I am His child. 

Refrain:
Oh, I am His child, His own loving child,
He cares for me so tenderly, for I am His child.

And when in the furnace of trial I stand,
My Savior beside me doth hold to my hand;
“Be faithful," He whispers in accents so mild;
The flames cannot harm me, for I am His child. 

When clouds thickly gather and hide from my view
The face of my Savior, His eye pierces through;
He keeps me from being by Satan beguiled;
Securely I’m resting, for I am His child. 

His child evermore, and He’s with me, I know,
E’en though through the valley of death I should go;
He keepeth my spirit by sin undefiled;
He’ll take me to heaven, for I am His child.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_jesus_little_lamb.php


I am Jesus’ little lamb,
Ever glad at heart I am;
For my Shepherd gently guides me,
Knows my need, and well provides me,
Loves me every day the same,
Even calls me by my name.

Day by day, at home, away,
Jesus is my Staff and Stay.
When I hunger, Jesus feeds me,
Into pleasant pastures leads me;
When I thirst, He bids me go
Where the quiet waters flow.

Who so happy as I am,
Even now the Shepherd’s lamb?
And when my short life is ended,
By His angel host attended,
He shall fold me to His breast,
There within His arms to rest.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_never_destroyed.php


I am never destroyed (2x)
My Jesus is living
I am never destroyed

I’ll overcome (3x)
Because Jesus is by my side
I’ll overcome (3x)
The victory is already mine

And the devil
Is burning away in anger
Come against me hot
’Cause with Jesus
I am boiling over

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_not_skilled_to_understand.php


I am not skilled to understand
What God hath willed, what God hath planned;
I only know that at His right hand
Is One Who is my Savior!

I take Him at His word indeed;
“Christ died for sinners"—this I read;
For in my heart I find a need
Of Him to be my Savior!

That He should leave His place on high
And come for sinful man to die,
You count it strange? So once did I,
Before I knew my Savior!

And oh, that He fulfilled may see
The travail of His soul in me,
And with His work contented be,
As I with my dear Savior!

Yea, living, dying, let me bring
My strength, my solace from this Spring;
That He Who lives to be my King
Once died to be my Savior!
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_not_worthy_holy_lord.php


I am not worthy, holy Lord,
That Thou shouldst come to me;
Speak but the word; one gracious word
Can set the sinner free.

I am not worthy; cold and bare
The lodging of my soul;
How canst Thou deign to enter there?
Lord, speak, and make me whole.

I am not worthy; yet, my God,
How can I say Thee nay;
Thee, Who didst give Thy flesh and blood
My ransom price to pay?

O come! in this sweet morning hour
Feed me with food divine;
And fill with all Thy love and power
This worthless heart of mine.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_on_my_way_to_heaven.php


I am on my way to Heaven where the saints are robed in white
Shouting glory, shouting glory!
To that blessèd land immortal where can never come the night,
Shouting glory all the way!
Refrain

O glory, hallelujah!
I am on the way to Heaven,
Shouting glory, shouting glory
O glory, hallelujah!
I am on the way to Heaven,
Shouting glory, all the way!

I am on my way to Heaven where the streets are paved with gold,
Shouting glory, shouting glory!
To the place of many mansions and of glories yet untold,
Shouting glory all the way!

Refrain

I am on my way to Heaven, blessèd land of pure delight,
Shouting glory, shouting glory!
Where the blest of every nation are forever clothed in white,
Shouting glory all the way!

Refrain

I am on my way to Heaven where I’ll see my Savior’s face
Shouting glory, shouting glory!
There I’ll sing redemption’s story, blessèd song of saving grace,
Shouting glory all the way!

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_persuaded.php


I am persuaded nothing shall separate us
from the wonderful love of God which is in Christ Jesus

I am persuaded nothing shall separate us
from the wonderful love of God which is in Christ Jesus


Life or death? Principalities?
Height or depth? No, none of these !

I am persuaded nothing shall separate us
from the wonderful love of God which is in Christ Jesus


Angels or powers? Some created thing?
The present or the future? No, none of these !!

I am persuaded nothing shall separate us
from the wonderful love of God which is in Christ Jesus
from the wonderful love of God which is in Christ Jesus

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_praying_blessed_savior.php


I am praying, blessèd Savior,
To be more and more like Thee;
I am praying that Thy Spirit
Like a dove may rest on me.
Refrain

Thou Who knowest all my weakness,
Thou Who knowest all my care,
While I plead each precious promise,
Hear, oh, hear and answer prayer.

I am praying, blessèd Savior,
For a faith so clear and bright
That its eye will see Thy glory
Through the deepest, darkest night.

Refrain

I am praying to be humbled
By the power of grace divine,
To be clothed upon with meekness,
And to have no will but Thine.

Refrain

I am praying, blessèd Savior,
And my constant prayer shall be
For a perfect consecration,
That shall make me more like Thee.

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_praying_for_you.php


I have a Savior, He’s pleading in glory,
A dear, loving Savior, though earth friends be few;
And now He is watching in tenderness o’er me;
And, oh, that my Savior were your Savior, too. 

Refrain:
For you I am praying,
For you I am praying,
For you I am praying,
I’m praying for you.

I have a Father; to me He has given
A hope for eternity, blessed and true;
And soon He will call me to meet Him in heaven,
But, oh, that He’d let me bring you with me, too! 

I have a robe; ’tis resplendent in whiteness,
Awaiting in glory my wondering view;
Oh, when I receive it all shining in brightness,
Dear friend, could I see you receiving one, too! 

When He has found you, tell others the story,
That my loving Savior is your Savior, too;
Then pray that your Savior may bring them to glory,
And prayer will be answered—’twas answered for you! 

Speak of that Savior, that Father in heaven,
That harp, crown, and robe which are waiting for you—
That peace you possess, and that rest to be given,
Still praying that Jesus may save them with you.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_resolved.php


I am resolved no longer to linger,
Charmed by the world’s delight,
Things that are higher, things that are nobler,
These have allured my sight.
Refrain

I will hasten to Him, hasten so glad and free;
Jesus, greatest, highest, I will come to Thee.
I will hasten, hasten to Him, hasten so glad and free;
Jesus, Jesus, greatest, highest, I will come to Thee.

I am resolved to go to the Savior,
Leaving my sin and strife;
He is the true One, He is the just One,
He hath the words of life.

Refrain

I am resolved to follow the Savior,
Faithful and true each day;
Heed what He sayeth, do what He willeth,
He is the living Way.

Refrain

I am resolved to enter the kingdom
Leaving the paths of sin;
Friends may oppose me, foes may beset me,
Still will I enter in.

Refrain

I am resolved, and who will go with me?
Come, friends, without delay,
Taught by the Bible, led by the Spirit,
We’ll walk the heav’nly way.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_saith_christ.php


1. "I Am," saith Christ, "the Way:"
Now, if we credit Him,
All other paths must lead astray,
How fair soe'er they seem.

2. "I am," saith Christ, "the Truth:"
Then all that lacks this test,
Proceed it from an angel's mouth,
Is but a lie at best.

3. "I Am," saith Christ, "the Life:"
Let this be seen by faith;
It follows, without further strife,
That all besides is death.

4. If what those words aver,
The Holy Ghost apply,
The simplest Christian shall not err,
Nor be deceived, nor die. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_saved_from_sin.php


I am saved from sin, I have peace within,
And I walk with Jesus day by day;
O His hand so strong, holds me all day long,
And with Him I will not go astray.
Refrain

He will hold me with His mighty hand!
He will hold me with His mighty hand!
In temptation He will help me stand!
For He will hold me with His mighty hand.

Many passed me by, heeding not my cry,
But the Savior heard and rescued me;
I was lost and blind, Jesus was so kind,
Lo, He touched my eyes and now I see.

Refrain

There’s a promise sure, and it shall endure,
“Lo, I will be with thee all the way";
And though foes assail, I shall still prevail,
For I know He helps me watch and pray.

Refrain

There is sweeter peace, there is perfect peace,
And my Father’s Word is wondrous dear;
There is mighty pow’r, for each trying hour,
There is love that “castteth out all fear!"

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_saved_today.php


I am free from condemnation since the Lord has made me whole,
I have ceased from my repining since He filled with joy my soul;
I am ever pressing onward in the straight and narrow way,
Singing, glory, hallelujah, I am saved today. 

Refrain:
I am saved today, I am saved today,
All my sins I have forsaken for the narrow way;
I am saved today, I am saved today,
Glory, glory, hallelujah, I am saved today.

I am living now for Jesus with a purpose to be true,
He will never, never leave me, I am sure He’ll take me through;
Though the trials may be many, and the host of hell array,
By His grace I just keep singing, I am saved today. 

Jesus, keep me in Thy service, help me ever watch and wait,
Praying always in the Spirit, till I reach the pearly gate;
Use me, Lord, to Thine own glory, that some other soul can say,
By the power of the Savior, I am saved today. 

There is naught can ever sever me from Christ, my Lord and King,
I am dwelling in His presence, I abide beneath His wing;
What a blessed consolation just to know that I can say
In the resurrection morning, I am saved today.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_so_glad_each_christmas_eve.php


I am so glad each Christmas Eve,
The night of Jesus’ birth!
Then like the sun the Star shone forth,
And angels sang on earth.

The little Child in Bethlehem,
He was a King indeed!
For He came down from Heaven above
To help a world in need.

He dwells again in heaven’s realm,
The Son of God today;
And still He loves His little ones
And hears them when they pray.

I am so glad on Christmas Eve!
His praises then I sing;
He opens then for every child
The palace of the King.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_so_glad_salvations_free.php


I am so glad salvation’s free to all who will receive it,
Glad that the news was brought to me when I was lost and sad;
Praise His dear Name, I can proclaim that truly I believe it,
For I am now His child, I know, and I’m so glad.

Refrain

Glory, honor be to His Name forever,
Never a greater Friend the sinful race has had;
Love Him, praise Him, Jesus, the matchless Savior,
He has redeemed this soul of mine, and I’m so glad.

I am so glad that I can tell to wayward souls the story,
Glad that by grace from day to day a helper I may be;
Finding delight in service true, my soul is winning glory,
Glory for Him Who gave His life to rescue me.

Refrain

I am so glad that all my heart to Jesus I have given,
Glad that at eventide my soul true sheaves to Him may bring;
I will be true until with all the happy throng in Heaven,
Sweeter and nobler praise I give to Christ, my King.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_so_glad_that_our_father_in_heaven.php


I am so glad that our Father in Heav’n
Tells of His love in the Book He has giv’n;
Wonderful things in the Bible I see,
This is the dearest, that Jesus loves me.
Refrain

I am so glad that Jesus loves me,
Jesus loves me, Jesus loves me.
I am so glad that Jesus loves me,
Jesus loves even me.

Though I forget Him, and wander away,
Still He doth love me wherever I stray;
Back to His dear loving arms I do flee,
When I remember that Jesus loves me.

Refrain

Oh, if there’s only one song I can sing,
When in His beauty I see the great King,
This shall my song through eternity be,
“Oh, what a wonder that Jesus loves me!"

Refrain

Jesus loves me, and I know I love Him;
Love brought Him down my poor soul to redeem;
Yes, it was love made Him die on the tree;
Oh, I am certain that Jesus loves me!

Refrain

If one should ask of me, how can I tell?
Glory to Jesus, I know very well!
God’s Holy Spirit with mine doth agree,
Constantly witnessing Jesus loves me.

Refrain

In this assurance I find sweetest rest,
Trusting in Jesus, I know I am blessed;
Satan, dismayed, from my soul now doth flee,
When I just tell him that Jesus loves me.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_so_happy_in_christ_today.php


That I go singing along my way;
Yes, I’m so happy to know and say,
“Jesus included me, too."
Refrain

Jesus included me, yes, He included me,
When the Lord said, “Whosoever," He included me;
Jesus included me, yes, He included me,
When the Lord said, “Whosoever," He included me.

Gladly I read, “Whosoever may
Come to the fountain of life today";
But when I read it I always say,
“Jesus included me, too."

Refrain

Ever God’s Spirit is saying, “Come!"
Hear the Bride saying, “No longer roam";
But I am sure while they’re calling home,
Jesus included me, too.

Refrain

“Freely come drink," words the soul to thrill!
O with what joy they my heart do fill!
For when He said, “Whosoever will,"
Jesus included me, too.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_so_small.php


I am so happy in Christ today,
My Lord, transform me
Make me just like You
I don’t want to do my own will
But Your will in me

My Lord, mould me
Your vessel I want to be
I am only clay
Without You I cannot live!

CHORUS

I am so small!
I depend on You
My soul is thirsty
Of Your presence in me!
I am so small!
I need Your love
All of my life
I consecrate to You!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_standing_on_the_word_of_god.php

        I am standing on the Word of God,
        Which came to men of old;
        The Holy Book our fathers loved,
        And treasured more than gold.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_the_bread_of_life.php
I am the bread of life
                He who comes to me shall not hunger
                He who believes in me shall not thirst
                No one can come to me
                Unless the father beckons
                And I will raise you up(3)
                On the last day.
                The bread that I will give
                Is my flesh for the life of the world
                And if you eat of this bread
                You shall live forever(2)
                Unless you eat
                Of the flesh of the Son of Man
                And drink of his blood,
                And drink of his blood,
                You shall not have life within you.
                I am the resurrection, I am the life
                If you believe in me
                Even though you die
                You shall live forever.
                Yes, lord I believe
                That you are the Christ
                The son of God
                Who has come into the world.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_the_bread_of_life.php
I am the bread of life
                He who comes to me shall not hunger
                He who believes in me shall not thirst
                No one can come to me
                Unless the father beckons
                And I will raise you up(3)
                On the last day.
                The bread that I will give
                Is my flesh for the life of the world
                And if you eat of this bread
                You shall live forever(2)
                Unless you eat
                Of the flesh of the Son of Man
                And drink of his blood,
                And drink of his blood,
                You shall not have life within you.
                I am the resurrection, I am the life
                If you believe in me
                Even though you die
                You shall live forever.
                Yes, lord I believe
                That you are the Christ
                The son of God
                Who has come into the world.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_the_lords.php



Whether I live or die,
Whether I wake or sleep,
Whether upon the land,
Or on the stormy deep;
When ’tis serene and calm,
Or when the wild winds blow,
I shall not be afraid—
I am the Lord’s, I know.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_thine.php



I am Thine dear, blessed Jesus, all Thine,
All of self now to the death I consign;
Gladly, gladly all I have I resign,
That salvation in its fullness be mine.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_thine_o_lord.php

          I am Thine, O Lord, I have heard Thy voice,
          And it told Thy love to me;
          But I long to rise in the arms of faith
          And be closer drawn to Thee.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_trusting_thee.php

            I am trusting Thee, Lord, Jesus,
            Trusting only Thee;
            Trusting Thee for full salvation,
            Great and free.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_unworthy.php

      I am unworthy
      Of all your kindness
      Of all the blessings
      Sent from above
      You are so faithful
      I've been ungrateful
      I am unworthy
      Of your pure love
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_waiting_for_the_dawning.php

            I am waiting for the dawning
            of the bright and blessed day,
            when the darksome night of sorrow
            shall have vanished far away:
            when for ever with the Saviour
            far beyond this vale of tears,
            I shall swell the song of worship
            through the everlasting years.

            I am looking at the brightness -
            see, it shineth from afar -
            of the clear and joyous beaming
            of the bright and morning Star.
            Through the dark grey mist of morning
            do I see its glorious light;
            then away with every shadow
            of this sad and weary night.

            I am waiting for the coming
            of the Lord who died for me;
            oh, His wounds have thrilled my spirit,
            'I will come again for Thee.'
            I can almost hear His footfall,
            on the threshold of the door,
            and my heart, my heart is longing
            to be with Him evermore.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_watching_for_the_coming.php

            I am watching for the coming of the glad millennial day,
            When our blessèd Lord shall come and catch His waiting bride away.
            Oh! my heart is filled with rapture as I labor, watch, and pray,
            For our Lord is coming back to earth again.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_weak_but_thou_art_strong.php

              I am weak, but Thou art strong;
              Jesus, keep me from all wrong;
              I’ll be satisfied as long
              As I walk, let me walk close to Thee.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_am_with_you.php

            You whom I took from the abyss
            From the farthest place of the earth
            I declared you are My servant
            I’ve chosen you
            Do not fear, for I will not reject you

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_asked_the_lord_that_i_might_grow.php

              I asked the Lord that I might grow
              In faith, and love, and every grace;
              Might more of His salvation know,
              And seek, more earnestly, His face.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_attribute.php

      Thoughts of adoration (adoration) as Your past enters my mind
      Things mankind did not deserve, You did in perfect time
      I think of the sweetness of Your love (of Your love) no one has yet to 
      taste
      Tears stream down mine as I try to seek Your facehttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_believe_in_a_hill.php

      There are things as we travel this earth shifting sands
      That transcend all the reason of man
      But the things that matter the most in this world
      They can never be held in our handhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_believe_jesus_saves.php



I am coming to Jesus for rest,
Rest such as the purified know;
My soul is athirst to be blest,
To be washed and made whiter than snow.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_believe_the_bible.php

              I believe the Bible, it taught me how to pray,
              Jesus heard and answered, took my sins away;
              Gave me peace and pardon, wrote my name above,
              Glory hallelujah! for His wondrous love.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_belong_to_jesus.php

                I belong to Jesus;
                I am not my own;
                All I have and all I am,
                Shall be His alone.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_belong_to_the_king.php

                  I belong to the King; I’m a child of His love,
                  I shall dwell in His palace so fair,
                  For He tells of its bliss in yon heaven above,
                  And His children in splendor shall share.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_bind_unto_myself_today.php

                  I bind unto myself today
                  The strong Name of the Trinity,
                  By invocation of the same
                  The Three in One and One in Three.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_bless_the_christ_of_god.php

                  I bless the Christ of God, I rest on love divine,
                  And with unfaltering lip and heart, I call the Savior mine.
                  His cross dispels each doubt; I bury in His tomb
                  Each thought of unbelief and fear,
                  Each lingering shade of gloom.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_bow_my_forehead_to_the_dust.php

                    I bow my forehead to the dust,
                    I veil mine eyes for shame,
                    And urge, in trembling self distrust,
                    A prayer without a claim.
                    No offering of mine own I have,
                    Nor works my faith to prove;
                    I can but give the gifts He gave,
                    And plead His love for love.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_bring_my_sins_to_thee.php

        written by Frances R Havergal


        I bring my sins to Thee,
        The sins I cannot count,
        That all may cleansèd be
        In Thy once opened Fount;
        I bring them, Savior, all to Thee;
        The burden is too great for me,
        The burden is too great for me.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_bring_thee_all.php

                      Father of love, of justice and of mercy,
                      Thou art the dawn, the star at eventide;
                      Show Thou Thy face, and light my way to Calv’ry,
                      There all my sins in Thee to hide.
                      I bring Thee all my sins,
                      None can forgive but Thee.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_builded_on_the_rock.php

                      I builded on the Rock, on the Rock of God,
                      Builded on the Rock, Christ Jesus;
                      I dug down deep and builded on the Rock,
                      Builded on the Rock of God.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_call_the_worlds_redeemer_mine.php

                      I call the world’s Redeemer mine;
                      He lives Who died for me, I know;
                      Who bought my soul with blood divine,
                      Jesus, shall re-appear below,
                      Stand in that dreadful day unknown,
                      And fix on earth His heavenly throne.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_call_you_friend.php

      Chorus 1:
      I call you friend
      The time we spend together goes so fast
      Until the end
      In Heaven we know the time will lasthttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_came_to_jesus_weary_worn_and_sad.php

                        I came to Jesus, weary, worn, and sad.
                        He took my sins away, He took my sins away.
                        And now His love has made my heart so glad,
                        He took my sins away.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_can_rejoice.php

      I can rejoice in the Lord of my life
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_can_tell_you_the_time.php

      I remember the time (I remember the time) when in darkness I wondered 
      (farther from home)
      On the mountain of sin (on the mountain of sin) I had traveled so long (I 
      had traveled so long)
      Like the prodigal son (like the prodigal son) all my good I had squandered 
      (sadly I roamed)
      But the Savior came in (but the Savior came in) and He gave me a song (twas 
      a beautiful song)https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_can_walk.php

      I can walk! I can walk! 
      Since the day that I was born I had been lame. 
      I can walk! I can walk! 
      I've been healed by the powr' of His precious holy name.
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_cannot_be_idle.php



I cannot be idle, for Jesus says, “Go
And work in My harvest today;
And then at the evening, when labor is done,
Whatever is right I will pay."
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_cannot_drift_beyond_thy_love.php

            I cannot drift beyond Thy love,
            Beyond Thy tender care;
            Where’er I stray, still from above
            Thine eye beholds me there.
            I cannot drift so far away
            But what Thy love divine
            Upon my path, by night and day,
            In mercy sweet doth shine.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_cannot_tell.php

                        I cannot tell why He Whom angels worship,
                        Should set His love upon the sons of men,
                        Or why, as Shepherd, He should seek the wanderers,
                        To bring them back, they know not how or when.
                        But this I know, that He was born of Mary
                        When Bethlehem’s manger was His only home,
                        And that He lived at Nazareth and labored,
                        And so the Savior, Savior of the world is come.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_cannot_tell_thee_whence_it_came.php

                          I cannot tell thee whence it came,
                          This peace within my breast;
                          But this I know, there fills my soul
                          A strange and tranquil rest.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_choose_you.php

      I could pray all day, but it wouldn’t be enough
      I could find all the right things to say, it wouldn’t win me anymore of 
      Your lovehttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_come_before_the_lord.php

      Lord, I desire to be what You want me to be
      To go where You want me to go, and in Your power believe
      I offer unto You this prayer of deepest praise
      Because I need to talk to You, these things to You I raise
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_come_o_savior_to_thy_table.php

                          I come, O Savior, to Thy table,
                          For weak and weary is my soul;
                          Thou, Bread of Life, alone art able
                          To satisfy and make me whole:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_come_to_the_garden_alone.php

                          I come to the garden alone
                          While the dew is still on the roses
                          And the voice I hear falling on my ear
                          The Son of God discloses.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_come_to_thee.php



Now I come, my Lord and Savior,
Humbly kneeling at Thy feet,
Sharing in Thy richest favor,
Full salvation pure and sweet.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_come_to_thee_o_blessed_lord.php

                          I come to Thee, O blessèd Lord,
                          Invited by Thy gracious Word
                          To this Thy feast, to sup with Thee;
                          Grant that a worthy guest I be.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_come_with_joy.php
I come with joy, a child of God,
            forgiven, loved, and free,
            the life of Jesus to recall,
            in love laid down for me.

            I come with Christians far and near
            to find, as all are fed,
            the new community of love
            in Christ's communion bread.

            As Christ breaks bread and bids us share,
            each proud division ends.
            The love that made us makes us one,
            and strangers now are friends.

            The spirit of the risen Christ,
            unseen, but ever near,
            is in such friendship better known:
            alive and among us here.

            Together met, together bound,
            by all that God has done,
            we'll go with joy, to give the world,
            the love that makes us one.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_come_with_joy_to_meet_my_lord.php
I come with joy to meet my Lord,
            forgiven, loved, and free,
            in awe and wonder to recall
            his life laid down for me.

            I come with Christians far and near
            to find, as all are fed,
            the new community of love
            in Christ's communion bread.

            As Christ breaks bread and bids us share,
            each proud division ends.
            That love that made us makes us one,
            and strangers now are friends.

            And thus with joy we meet our Lord.
            His presence, always near,
            is in such friendship better known:
            we see and praise him here.

            Together met, together bound,
            we'll go our different ways,
            and as his people in the world,
            we'll live and speak his praise.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_come_the_great_redeemer_cries.php
"I come," the great Redeemer cries,
            "To do thy will, O Lord!"
            At Jordan's stream, behold!
            He seals the sure prophetic word.

            "Thus it becomes to fulfill
            all righteousness," he said.
            Then, faithful to the Lord's commands,
            through Jordan's flood was led.

            Hark, a glad voice! The Father speaks
            from heaven's exalted height:
            "This is my Son, my well-beloved
            in whom I take delight."

            The Savior Jesus, well-beloved!
            His Name we will profess,
            like him desirous to fulfill
            God's will in righteousness.

            No more we'll count ourselves our own
            but his in bonds of love.
            Oh, may such bonds for ever draw
            our souls to things above!.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_could_not_do_without_thee.php

                            I could not do without Thee
                            O Savior of the lost,
                            Whose precious blood redeemed me
                            At such tremendous cost.
                            Thy righteousness, thy pardon
                            Thy precious blood, must be
                            My only hope and comfort,
                            My glory and my plea.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_could_tell.php

      Chorus:
      You've been readin' in the Word
      And you've been talkin' to the Lord
      I could tell it right away, you've been in it night and day
      I could tell by what you do and what you say
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_cried_to_god_in_my_distress.php

                            I cried to God in my distress,
                            And by the Lord my prayer was heard;
                            O save me, Lord, from lying lips
                            And from the false, deceitful word.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_danced_in_the_morning.php

                            I danced in the morning when the world was begun,
                            And I danced in the moon and the stars and the sun,
                            And I came down from heaven and I danced on the 
                            earth,
                            At Bethlehem I had my birth.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_delight_in_the_lord.php

      I delight in the Lord
      My soul rejoices in my God
      For He has clothed my with garments
      Of salvation
      And arrayed me in a robe
      And arrayed me in a robe
      Of righteousness
      Of righteousness
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_did_this_for_you.php

      As I stood there looking up everything grew silent
      My life flashed before my eyes
      I tried to see how I even mattered
      Or why I ever lived my lifehttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_do_believe_in_the_bible.php

      I do believe the Bible, the blesséd Word of God,
      And close unto its promises I cleave.
      It points me to the pathway the saints and martyrs trod,
      My Father is its Author, and I believe.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_do_love_jesus_with_all_my_heart.php




“I do love Jesus with all my heart"
Because of what He did for me;
His life for me on the cross He gave,
He died for me on Calvary.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_do_not_ask_o_lord.php




I do not ask, O Lord, that life may be
A pleasant road;
I do not ask that Thou wouldst take from me
Aught of its load.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_do_not_ask_to_see_the_way.php




I do not ask to see the way
My feet will have to tread;
But only that my soul may feed
Upon the living Bread.
’Tis better far that I should walk
By faith close to His side;
I may not know the way I go,
But oh, I know my Guide.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_do_not_come_because_my_soul.php

        I do not come because my soul
        Is free from sin and pure and whole
        And worthy of Thy grace;
        I do not speak to Thee because
        I’ve ever justly kept Thy laws
        And dare to meet Thy face.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_do_not_know_how.php

  I do not know how Adam’s sin
  Lives on in you and me,
  Nor how it causes all the wrong
  And sorrow that we see.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_do_not_know_why_oft_round_me.php

  I do not know why oft ’round me
  My hopes all shattered seem to be;
  God’s perfect plan I cannot see,
  But some day I’ll understand.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_dont_mind.php

      I don't mind my sorrow, I don't mind my tears
      I don't mind my heartaches, cause my Lord is near
      When I think of Calvary my troubles are behind
      Cause He died to save me, I don't mindhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_dont_want_to_live_no_more_without_jesus.php

      Many times I get discouraged wond’ring what I can do
      Troubles seem to pile upon me with no answer in view
      Then a voice within me whispers there is one who still cares
      On your knees and call on Jesus
      He will answer your prayerhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_dreamed_that_the_great_judgment_morning.php

  I dreamed that the great judgment morning
  Had dawned, and the trumpet had blown;
  I dreamed that the nations had gathered
  To judgment before the white throne;
  From the throne came a bright shining angel,
  And he stood on the land and the sea,
  And he swore with his hand raised to Heaven,
  That time was no longer to be.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_feel_fine.php

      Chorus:
      All I do is ask for your forgiveness (all I do is ask for it) (you've made 
      reply)
      You already made reply (You already made reply) (my heart is)
      Since He came my heart is filled with gladness (since He came my heart is 
      filled) (I'll never)
      I won't ever have to die (I won't ever have to die) (won't have to)
      All I do is ask for your forgiveness (all I do is ask for it) (you've made 
      reply)
      You already made reply (You already made reply) (my heart is)
      Since He came my heart is filled with gladness (since He came my heart is 
      filled) (I'll never)
      I won't ever have to die (I won't ever have to die) (won't have to)
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_feel_good.php

      Intro: (George starts)
      Well, I feel good, good, good
      Well, I feel good, oh yes my Lord
      Because there's something 'bout the Spirit of
      Jesus that makes me feel good, good, good, goodhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_feel_like_singing_all_the_time.php

    I feel like singing all the time,
    My tears are wiped away;
    For Jesus is a friend of mine,
    I値l serve Him every day.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_feel_the_winds_of_god_today.php

    I feel the winds of God today; today my sail I lift,
    Though heavy, oft with drenching spray, and torn with many a rift;
    If hope but light the water’s crest, and Christ my bark will use,
    I’ll seek the seas at His behest, and brave another cruise.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_find_thee_so_precious.php

        O what are the pleasures that silver can buy?
        They come and they go, but cannot satisfy;
        But praised be the Savior! I cease not to cry,
        I find Thee so precious, my Savior!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_found_my_god_in_early_years.php

written by Matias Orheimhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_found_such_a_wonderful_savior.php

    I found such a wonderful Savior
    In Jesus, my Lord and my King!
    Undying and true His devotion;
    My heart shall his glad praises sing.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_give_my_all_to_thee.php



My blessed Lord, I will be Thine,
Thy blood has made me free;
Thy precious word and love divine
Has won my heart to Thee.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_give_you_all_the_honor.php
And I worship You
            I give my life to You
            I fall down on my knees (2x)

            As Your Spirit moves upon me now
            You meet my deepest need
            And I lift my hands up to Your throne
            Your mercy I receive

            You have broken chains that bound me
            You’ve set this captive free
            I will lift my voice to praise Your name
            For all eternityhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_glad_i_counted_the_cost.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_gotta_feelin.php

      Chorus:
      I . . . I gotta feelin'
      I gotta feelin' and I wanna feel it every day
      You . . . You gotta feelin'
      You gotta feelin' and your gonna praise Him every day
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_greet_thee_who_my_sure_redeemer_art.php

    I greet Thee, who my sure Redeemer art,
    My only trust and Savior of my heart,
    Who pain didst undergo for my poor sake;
    I pray Thee from our hearts all cares to take.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_a_friend.php

        I have a Friend and He came to seek me,
        I was afar on the ocean wave,
        Into the fold of His love He brought me,
        Peace to my soul from that hour He gave.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_a_friend_you_ought_to_know_him.php

      I have a Friend—you ought to know Him,
      He is a Savior tender and true;
      Jesus, my King—how I adore Him!
      And He should be as precious to you.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_a_friend_so_dear.php

      I have a Friend so dear,
      Constant and true is He,
      Filling my heart with cheer,
      So good to me.
      He’s covered ev’ry sin and stain,
      His pow’r now makes me whole again,
      And soon with Him fore’er I’ll reign—
      Jesus, my Friend.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_a_friend_so_patient.php

      I have a Friend, so patient, kind, forbearing,
      Of all my friends this Friend doth love me best;
      Though I am weak and sinful, yet when sharing
      His love and mercy I am ever blest.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_a_friend_so_precious.php

      I have a Friend so precious,
      So very dear to me,
      He loves me with a tender love,
      He loves me faithfully;
      I could not live apart from Him,
      I love to feel Him nigh;
      And so we dwell together,
      My Lord and I.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_a_friend_who_loveth_me.php

        I have a Friend Who loveth me,
        He gave His life on Calvary;
        Upon the cross my sins He bore,
        And I am saved forevermore.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_a_friend_whose_life_is_sweet_to_me.php

      I have a Friend Whose life is sweet to me,
      I知 happy in Jesus today;
      His blood doth keep me clean and make me free,
      I知 happy in Jesus today.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_a_future_all_sublime.php

      I have a future all sublime,
      Beyond the realms of space and time,
      Where my Redeemer I shall see,
      And sorrow nevermore shall be.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_a_home.php



I have a home prepared for me,
A mansion bright across the sea;
And when I pass to yon bright shore,
I’ll dwell with Christ forevermore.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_a_hope.php



I have a hope, serene and sure,
That anchors past the veil;
In all the storms it holds secure,
Nor will it ever fail.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_a_redeemer_who_saves_me_from_sin.php

      I have a Redeemer Who saves me from sin;
      Now He’s abiding forever within,
      His life for my ransom so freely He gave—
      ’Tis Jesus my Savior, mighty to save.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_a_rock.php

      Chorus 1:
      I have a rock on which I stand
      I have a home in a weary land
      I have a Lord who takes my hand
      A song to sing with the angel band
      I know the Lord will comfort me
      And lead me on to victory
      I am His child and He loves me
      He's my rock, HE'S MY ROCK
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_a_savior.php

      I have a Savior, He died for me
      In cruel anguish on Calv’ry’s tree.
      I do not merit such love divine,
      Only God’s mercy makes Jesus mine.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_a_savior_hes_pleading_in_glory.php

      I have a Savior, He’s pleading in glory,
      A dear, loving Savior though earth friends be few;
      And now He is watching in tenderness o’er me;
      And oh, that my Savior were your Savior, too.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_a_song_i_love_to_sing.php

      I have a song I love to sing,
      Since I have been redeemed,
      Of my Redeemer, Savior King,
      Since I have been redeemed.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_decided.php



I have decided to follow Jesus;
I have decided to follow Jesus;
I have decided to follow Jesus;
No turning back, no turning back.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_decided_to_follow_jesus.php



I have decided to follow Jesus;
I have decided to follow Jesus;
I have decided to follow Jesus;
No turning back, no turning back.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_entered_beulah_land.php

      Oh, my cup is overflowing
      With the goodness of the Lord;
      I am trusting in His mercy,
      And rejoicing in His Word.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_entered_the_valley_of_blessing_so_sweet.php

        I have entered the valley of blessing so sweet,
        And Jesus abides with me there;
        And His Spirit and blood make my cleansing complete,
        And His perfect love casteth out fear.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_followed_truth_and_justice.php

        I have followed truth and justice;
        Leave me not in deep distress;
        Be my help and my protection,
        Let the proud no more oppress.
        For Thy Word and Thy salvation,
        Lord, my eyes with longing fail;
        Teach Thy statutes to Thy servant,
        Let Thy mercy now prevail.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_found_a_friend_in_jesus.php

        I have found a friend in Jesus, He’s everything to me,
        He’s the fairest of ten thousand to my soul;
        The Lily of the Valley, in Him alone I see
        All I need to cleanse and make me fully whole.
        In sorrow He’s my comfort, in trouble He’s my stay;
        He tells me every care on Him to roll.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_found_a_precious_resting_place.php

        I have found a precious resting place
        In the shelter of redeeming grace;
        Here with joy I see my Savior’s face,
        Under the atoning blood.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_found_his_grace_all_complete.php

        I have found His grace is all complete,
        He supplieth ev’ry need;
        While I sit and learn at Jesus’ feet,
        I am free, yes, free indeed.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_good_news_to_bring.php
I'm gonna take a trip
    In the good old gospel ship,
    Christ the Lord has paid my fare;
    I'll hear the trumpet sound
    And I'll leave this sinful ground,
    I'll go sailing through the air.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_heard_of_a_land2.php

          I have heard of a land on the far away strand,
          ’Tis a beautiful home of the soul;
          Built by Jesus on high, where we never shall die,
          ’Tis a land where we never grow old.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_heard_of_a_land.php

          I have heard of a land
          On a far away strand,
          In the Bible the story is told,
          Where no cares ever come,
          Neither darkness nor gloom,
          And nothing shall ever grow old.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_heard_the_welcome_story.php

            I have heard the welcome story
            Of redemption, full and free;
            I have wandered, O my Father,
            But Thy child I long to be.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_heard_thy_voice.php

            I heard heard Thy voice, Lord Jesus,
            Saying in Thy grace divine:
            “Fear thou not, I have redeemed thee;
            I have called thee, thou art Mine."
            Lord, I bring Thee full allegiance!
            Therefore now to Thee I sing,
            Answ’ring, “Yea, Thou hast redeemed me;
            I am Thine, my Lord, my King!"https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_left_all_the_world_to_follow_jesus.php



In this world I found no rest,
Sorrow filled my aching breast,
Till I turned to One who loved me best of all;
Oh, what sacred peace I find,
Since my all I have resigned!
I have left all the world to follow Jesus.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_made_my_choice_to_follow_christ_each_day.php

              I have made my choice to follow Christ each day,
              I am Thine for service, Lord;
              Tho’ I sometimes falter on the thorny way,
              I am Thine for service, Lord.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_other_plans_for_you.php

      With all our good intentions we make plans for everyday
      We forget about our Savior in the garden as He prayed
      "Take this cup of suffering from me, but it's your will I must do"
      And His Father answered softly, "I have other plans for you"https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_read_of_a_beautiful_city.php

              I have read of a beautiful city,
              Far away in the kingdom of God;
              I have read how its walls are of jasper,
              How its streets are all golden and broad;
              In the midst of the street is life’s river,
              Clear as crystal and pure to behold;
              But not half of that city’s bright glory
              To mortals has ever been told.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_settled_the_question.php

                I remember when the Lord spoke to my soul,
                I could feel the heavy burden from me roll
                When He spoke the gracious words, “Wilt thou be whole?"
                Then I settled the question forever.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_sought_round.php

            1. I Have Sought Round This Verdant Earth For Unfading Joy
            I have tried every source for mirth, but all, all will cloy;
            Lord, bestow on me grace to set my spirit free;
            Thine the praise shall be; mine, mine the joy.

            2. I have wandered in mazes dark, of doubt and distress;
            I have not had a kindly spark my spirit to bless;
            Cheerless unbelief filled my lab'ring soul with grief;
            What shall give relief? What shall give peace?

            3. I was brought to thy gospel, Lord, from folly away;
            Made to trust in thy holy word, which taught me to pray;
            Here I found release, here my wearied soul found peace,
            Hopes of endless bliss, eternal day.

            4. I'm a stranger and pilgrim here in this world of woe,
            But I find my Redeemer near, as onward I go;
            Jesus is my friend, he'll be with me to the end,
            And from foes defend my path below.

            5. I have heard my Redeemer say, "My promise is sure;
            I have taught thee to watch and pray, all hardness endure."
            Jesus be my guide, in thy promise I'll confide;
            Keep me near thy side, my life, my way.

            6. I will praise thee, my heav'nly King, I'll praise and adore,
            My heart's richest tribute bring to thee, God of power;
            And in Heav'n above, saved by thy redeeming love,
            Loud the strains shall move forever more.

            7. Hallelujahs through heav'n will ring, salvation the theme;
            Glory, honor, and praise we'll sing to God and the Lamb.
            Crowns of glory wear, palms of vict'ry we shall bear;
            Shouts of triumph there never shall end.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_tried_to_count_his_blessings.php

                I have tried to count His blessings, and I fail to understand
                Why the Lord should so richly reward;
                Could I count the stars of heaven, add to them earth’s grains of 
                sand,
                Still His blessings are more, praise the Lord!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_walked_alone_with_jesus.php
I have walked alone with Jesus
    in a fellowship divine.
    Never more can earth allure me,
    I am His and He is mine.

    On the mountain I have seen Him,
    Christ my Comforter and Friend
    And the glory of His presence
    Will be with me to the end.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_have_wandered_off_from_heaven.php

                  I had wandered off from Heaven,
                  On the mountains cold and gray,
                  When I heard my Savior calling,
                  To His lost sheep far away;
                  How I listened as the tear drops
                  Coursed adown like falling rain,
                  While His tender words of promise,
                  Made my spirit glad again.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_hear_a_voice_that_comes_from_far.php

        I hear a voice that comes from far;
        From Calvary it sounds abroad;
        It soothes my soul, and calms my fear;
        It speaks of pardon bought with blood.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_hear_my_savior_saying.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_hear_then_thousand_voices_singing.php

                  I hear ten thousand voices singing,
                  Their praises to the Lord on high;
                  Far distant shores and hills are ringing
                  With anthems of their nations’ joy.
                  “Praise ye the Lord! for He has given
                  To lands in darkness hid His light;
                  As morning rays light up the heaven,
                  His Word has chased away our night."https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_hear_the_savior_say.php

                  I hear the Savior say,
                  “Thy strength indeed is small;
                  Child of weakness, watch and pray,
                  Find in Me thine all in all."https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_hear_the_words_of_love.php

        I hear the words of love,
        I gaze upon the blood,
        I see the mighty sacrifice,
        And I have peace with God.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_hear_thy_welcome_voice.php

                  I hear Thy welcome voice
                  That calls me, Lord, to Thee,
                  For cleansing in Thy precious blood
                  That flowed on Calvary.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_heard_a_sound_of_voices.php

                  I heard a sound of voices,
                  Around the great white throne,
                  With harpers harping on their harps
                  To Him that sat thereon:
                  “Salvation, glory, honor!"
                  I heard the song arise,
                  As through the courts of heaven it rolled
                  In wondrous harmonies.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_heard_the_bells.php



I heard the bells on Christmas day
Their old familiar carols play,
And wild and sweet the words repeat
Of peace on earth, good will to men.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_heard_the_bells_on_christmas_day.php

                  I heard the bells on Christmas day
                  Their old familiar carols play,
                  And wild and sweet the words repeat
                  Of peace on earth, good will to men.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_heard_the_voice_of_jesus.php

                  I heard the voice of Jesus say, “Come unto Me and rest;
                  Lay down, thou weary one, lay down Thy head upon My breast."
                  I came to Jesus as I was, weary and worn and sad;
                  I found in Him a resting place, and He has made me glad.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_hunger_and_i_thurst.php

                  I hunger and I thirst,
                  Jesu, my manna be;
                  Ye living waters, burst
                  Out of the rock for me.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_a_man_his_name_is_jesus.php

      Chorus:
      I know a man (I know a man), His name is Jesus
      He died for you and He died for me
      He gave us a chance to be free
      I know a man (I know a man), He said He won't forsake me
      Whether times are up or times are down
      My Savior He will be
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_a_man2.php

      Oh, well, ah yeah
      Whoo!
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_gods_promise_is_true.php

                  For God so loved this sinful world,
                  His Son He freely gave,
                  That whosoever would believe
                  Eternal life should have.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_he_is_mine.php

                  A long time I wandered in darkness and sin,
                  And wondered if ever the light would shine in;
                  I heard Christian friends speak of raptures divine,
                  And I wished—how I wished—that their Savior were mine.
                  I wished He were mine, yes, I wished He were mine;
                  I wished—how I https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_his_love_is_mine.php

            Oh! the love that gave my Lord to die on Calvary!
            Matchless love untold, purer far than gold;
            Love that offered all upon the cross to set me free,
            This is the love of Christ for me.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_i_love_thee_better_lord.php

                  I know I love Thee better, Lord
                  Than any earthly joy,
                  For Thou hast given me the peace
                  Which nothing can destroy.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_in_my_heart_what_it_means.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_in_whom_my_soul_believes.php

                  I know in Whom my soul believes,
                  I know in Whom I trust;
                  The Holy One, the merciful,
                  The only wise and just.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_love.php

      Chorus:
      I know love, love, my love, He loves me
      I know love, love, my love, He loves me
      I know love, love, my love, He loves me
      Not for what I am but who He is
      I know that love, love, my love, He loves me
      I know love, love, my love, He loves me
      I know love, love, my love, He loves me
      Not for what I am but who He is
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_my_faith_is_founded.php

        I know my faith is founded
        On Jesus Christ, my God and Lord;
        And this my faith confessing,
        Unmoved I stand upon His Word.
        Man’s reason cannot fathom
        The truth of God profound;
        Who trusts her subtle wisdom
        Relies on shifting ground.
        God’s Word is all sufficient,
        It makes divinely sure,
        And trusting in its wisdom,
        My faith shall rest secure.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_my_faith_is_founded.php

        I know my faith is founded
        On Jesus Christ, my God and Lord;
        And this my faith confessing,
        Unmoved I stand upon His Word.
        Man’s reason cannot fathom
        The truth of God profound;
        Who trusts her subtle wisdom
        Relies on shifting ground.
        God’s Word is all sufficient,
        It makes divinely sure,
        And trusting in its wisdom,
        My faith shall rest secure.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_my_heavenly_father_knows.php

                  I know my heav地ly Father knows
                  The storms that would my way oppose;
                  But He can drive the clouds away,
                  And turn the darkness into day.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_my_name_is_there.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_my_savior_is_there.php

      When I'm heavy laden (laden), when my friends are gone (all gone)
      When I'm all forsaken, when I'm left to walk alone (alone)
      I'll just keep on smilin', (keep on) smilin' through my tears
      (Because I) For I know my Saviour is therehttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_not.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_not_if_or_dark_or_bright.php

        I know not if or dark or bright
        Shall be my lot;
        If that wherein my hopes delight
        Be best or not.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_the_hour.php

                    I know not the hour when my Lord will come
                    To take me away to His own dear home;
                    But I know that His presence will lighten the gloom,
                    And that will be glory for me.
                    And that will be glory for me,
                    Oh, that will be glory for me!
                    But I know that His presence will lighten the gloom,
                    And that will be glory for me.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_not_what_awaits_me.php

                      I know not what awaits me,
                      God kindly veils mine eyes,
                      And o’er each step of my onward way
                      He makes new scenes to rise;
                      And ev’ry joy He sends me, comes
                      A sweet and glad surprise.
                      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_not_what_the_future_hath.php

                      I know not what the future hath
                      Of marvel or surprise,
                      Assured alone that life and death
                      God’s mercy underlies.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_not_when_the_lord_will_come.php

                        I know not when the Lord will come,
                        Or at what hour He may appear,
                        Whether at midnight or at morn,
                        Or at what season of the year.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_not_where_the_road_will_lead.php
I know not where the road will lead
            I follow day by day,
            or where it ends: I only know
            I walk the King's highway.
            I know not if the way is long,
            and no one else can say;
            but rough or smooth, up hill or down,
            I walk the King's highway.

            And some I love have reached the end,
            but some with me may stay,
            their faith and hope still guiding me:
            I walk the King's highway.
            The way is truth, the way is love,
            for light and strength I pray,
            and through the years of life, to God
            I walk the King's highway.

            The countless hosts lead on before,
            I must not fear nor stray;
            with them, the pilgrims of the faith,
            I walk the King's highway.
            Through light and dark the road leads on 
            till dawns the endless day,
            when I shall know why in this life
            I walk the King's highway.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_not_why_gods_wondrous_grace.php

                        I know not why God’s wondrous grace
                        To me He hath made known,
                        Nor why, unworthy, Christ in love
                        Redeemed me for His own.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_of_a_name.php

                          I know of a name, a beautiful name,
                          That angels brought down to earth;
                          They whispered it low, one night long ago,
                          To a maiden of lowly birth.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_of_a_sleep_in_jesus_name.php

            1. I know of a sleep in Jesus' name,
            A rest from all toil and sorrow;
            Earth folds in her arms my weary frame
            And shelters it till the morrow;
            My soul is at home with God in heaven,
            Her sorrows are past and over.
            https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_of_a_world_that_is_sunk_in_shame.php

                          I know of a world that is sunk in shame,
                          Where hearts oft faint and tire;
                          But I know of a Name, a precious Name,
                          That can set that world on fire;
                          Its sound is sweet, its letters flame.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_somebody.php

      I don’t understand how the world can be held
      On a thread of nothing, hanging in space
      I don’t have a clue where the chains can be found
      That bind the stars of heaven and keep them in place
      Can somebody, please, explain the awesome decree
      That tells the tide what to do and holds back the sea?
      I don’t know much about all of these things
      But I know somebody who doeshttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_that_my_redeemer_lives2.php

                            I know that my Redeemer lives,
                            And ever prays for me;
                            A token of His love He gives,
                            A pledge of liberty.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_that_my_redeemer_lives.php

                          I know that my Redeemer lives;
                          What comfort this sweet sentence gives!
                          He lives, He lives, who once was dead;
                          He lives, my ever living Head.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_that_my_redeemer_liveth.php

                              I know that my Redeemer liveth,
                              And on the earth again shall stand;
                              I know eternal life He giveth,
                              That grace and power are in His hand.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_that_some_day.php

                              I know that some day from His heavenly throne,
                              The blessèd Redeemer of men
                              Will come in His glory to gather His own;
                              He is coming, is coming again.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_that_you_search_me.php
My Lord
            I know that You love me (4x) https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_the_hour.php

                    I know not the hour when my Lord will come
                    To take me away to His own dear home;
                    But I know that His presence will lighten the gloom,
                    And that will be glory for me.
                    And that will be glory for me,
                    Oh, that will be glory for me!
                    But I know that His presence will lighten the gloom,
                    And that will be glory for me.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_the_love.php

      He loves me, I know He loves me (I know His love)
      He loves me, I know He loves me (blessed love)
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_thy_hand_upholdeth_thee.php

                              I know Thy hand upholdeth me,
                              My Savior and my God;
                              And step by step I’ll follow Thee
                              Where’er Thy feet have trod.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_who_holds_tomorrow.php

      I don't know about tomorrow
      I just live from day to day
      I don't borrow from its sunshine
      For its skies may turn to gray
      I don't worry o'er the future
      For I know what Jesus said
      And today I'll walk beside Him
      For He knows what is aheadhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_know_whom_i_have_believed.php

                              I know not why God’s wondrous grace
                              To me He hath made known,
                              Nor why, unworthy, Christ in love
                              Redeemed me for His own.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_lay_my_sins_on_jesus.php

                              I lay my sins on Jesus, the spotless Lamb of God;
                              He bears them all, and frees us from the accursèd 
                              load;
                              I bring my guilt to Jesus, to wash my crimson 
                              stains
                              White in His blood most precious, till not a stain 
                              remains.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_leave_all_things_to_gods_direction.php

            1. I leave all things to God's direction,
            He loveth me in weal and woe;
            His will is good, true His affection.
            With tender love His heart doth glow.
            My Fortress and my Rock is He:
            What pleaseth God, that pleaseth me.
            https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_left_it_all_with_jesus.php

                              Oh, I left it all with Jesus, long ago
                              All my sins I brought Him and my woe
                              When by faith I saw Him bleeding on the tree;
                              Heard His still small whisper, “’Tis for thee!"
                              From my weary heart the burden rolled away;
                              Happy day! happy day!
                              From my weary heart the burden rolled away;
                              Happy day! happy day!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_lift_my_banner_saith_the_lord.php

                                “I lift My banner," saith the Lord,
                                “Where Antichrist has stood;
                                The city of My Gospel foes
                                Shall be a field of blood.
                                https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_lift_my_eyes_up.php
I lift my 
                eyes up, up to the mountains;https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_lift_my_hands.php
And I will serve no 
            foreign gods
            Nor any other treasure
            You are my heart’s desire
            Spirit without measure
            Unto Your name, I will raise my sacrificehttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_life_my_heart_to_thee2.php

                                I lift my heart to Thee,
                                My God and Guide most just;
                                Now suffer me to take no shame,
                                For in Thee I do trust.
                                Direct me in Thy truth,
                                And teach me, I Thee pray;
                                Thou art my God and Savior,
                                On Thee I wait alway.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_lift_my_heart_today.php

                                I lift my heart today in praise
                                To Him Who loves me so,
                                Whose mercy crowneth all my days,
                                And makes my cup o’erflow.
                                O have I loved Him as I should
                                For all His blessings free?
                                Praise God Who giveth naught but good,
                                For He is good to me!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_lift_my_soul_to_god.php

        I lift my soul to God,
        My trust is in His Name:
        Let not my foes that seek my blood
        Still triumph in my shame.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_little_see.php

        I little see, I little know,
        Yet I can fear no ill;
        He who hath guided me till now
        Will be my leader still.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_live_but_in_thee.php

                                O Light of my spirit and Joy of my heart,
                                Thou Chief among thousands, how lovely Thou art!
                                I think of Thy goodness where’er I may be,
                                My Rock and Salvation, I live but for Thee.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_long_ago_left_egypt_for_the_promised_land.php

                                I long ago left Egypt for the promised land,
                                I trusted in my Savior, and to His guiding hand;
                                He led me out to vict’ry through the great Red 
                                Sea,
                                I sang a song of triumph, and shouted, I am 
                                free!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_look_at_the_cross_upon_calvary.php

                                I look at the cross upon Calvary,
                                And oh, what a wonder divine,
                                To think of the wealth it holds for me—
                                The riches of Heaven are mine.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_look_to_thee_in_every_need.php

                                I look to Thee in every need, and never look in 
                                vain;
                                I feel Thy strong and tender love, and all is 
                                well again.
                                The thought of Thee is mightier far than sin and 
                                pain and sorrow are.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_love_him_because_he_first_loved_me.php

        Christ Jesus my Lord from Heaven came,
        To save me from guilt and sin and shame;
        His death on the cross of Calvary
        Brought pardon and gave me liberty.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_love_his_appearing.php







There was One came to die in the sinner’s stead,
Who the fullness of grace brought to view;
He is coming again, Judge of quick and dead,
And I love His appearing, don’t you?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_love_jesus.php







I love Jesus, for He saved my soul;
From His cross the tides of mercy roll;
Long and far He sought me, when astray;
Now, He leads me in His own right way.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_love_my_jesus_quite_alone.php







I love my Jesus quite alone.
The Bride, the Bridegroom of my spirit;
No others shall my heart, no, none,
Through love, through loving more inherit.
No man can do at once for two.
For one’s, for one’s will and for t’others:
Therefore I’ll leave all others.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_love_the_lord_for_my_request.php

  I love the Lord, for my request
  And humble plea He makes His care;
  In Him through life my faith shall rest,
  For He both hears and answers prayer.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_love_the_lord_he_heard_my_voice.php

  I Love the Lord; He heard my voice,
  And owned my humble prayer:
  He makes my broken heart rejoice:
  He makes my soul His care.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_love_the_lord_his_strength_is_mine.php

  I love the Lord, His strength is mine;
  He is my God, I trust His grace;
  My Fortress high, my Shield divine,
  My Savior and my Hiding Place.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_love_the_voice_divine.php

  I love the voice divine that speaks
  The words of life and peace,
  That bids the penitent rejoice,
  And sin and sorrow cease.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_love_the_volumes_of_thy_word.php

    I love the volumes of Thy Word;
    What light and joy those leaves afford
    To souls benighted and distressed!
    Thy precepts guide my doubtful way,
    Thy fear forbids my feet to stray,
    Thy promise leads my heart to rest.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_love_thee.php

      I love Thee, I love Thee, I love Thee, my Lord;
      I love Thee, my Savior, I love Thee, my God;
      I love Thee, I love Thee, and that Thou dost know;
      But how much I love Thee my actions will show.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_love_thy_kingdom_lord.php

      I love Thy kingdom, Lord,
      The house of Thine abode,
      The church our blessed Redeemer saved
      With His own precious blood.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_love_to_hear_the_story.php

      I love to hear the story which angel voices tell,
      How once the King of glory came down on earth to dwell.
      I am both weak and sinful; but this I surely know,
      The Lord came down to save me, because He loved me so.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_love_to_tell_the_story_how_the_lord_from_heaven_came.php

      I love to hear the story how the Lord from Heaven came
      And did not fear to visit men in all their sin and shame;
      But touched the sick and made them well, the blind and they did see,
      And said of little children, “Suffer them to come to Me."https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_love_to_praise_him.php

        I love to praise Him
        I love to praise His name
        I love to praise Him
        I love to praise His name
        I love to praise Him
        I love to praise His name
        I love to...I love to praise His holy namehttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_love_to_serve_my_jesus.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_love_to_sing_of_heavn.php

      I love to sing of Heav地,
      Where white robed angels are;
      Where many a friend is gathered safe
      From fear, and toil, and care.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_love_to_steal_awhile_away.php

      I love to steal awhile away
      From every cumbering care,
      And spend the hours of closing day
      In humble, grateful, prayer.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_love_to_tell_the_story.php

      I love to tell the story of unseen things above,
      Of Jesus and His glory, of Jesus and His love.
      I love to tell the story, because I know ’tis true;
      It satisfies my longings as nothing else can do.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_love_to_think_my_father_knows.php

      I love to think my Father knows
      Why I have missed the path I chose,
      And that I soon shall clearly see
      The way He led was best for me.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_love_to_think_of_jesus.php

      I love to think of Jesus, who else could it be,
      Who could come down from Heav’n to save a soul like me?
      To think of Him does not repay the debt I owe,
      I’ll do my best my gratitude to show.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_love_you2.php

            O I love You
            More than a bee loves a flower
            O I love You, and this love is so strong 
            O I love You, more than all 
            More than life that’s within me
            O I love You, and nothing steals
            This endless love away from me
            O I love You, ’cause You’ve taken
            All my burdens for the cross
            My love for You is greater than my life!

            O I love You
            More than a prisoner craves to see
            All the light of liberty and live free
            O I love You, more than a sailor
            Longs for the land he left behind
            O I love You, more than the exile
            Loves the land that hated him
            O I love You, more than a blind man
            Yearns to see a ray of light
            My love for You is greater than my life!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_love_you.php

            I can’t live without having
            Your concern, Your presence
            I need to always receive
            Your love, Your perfect peace

            I don’t want to be far from You
            I’ve suffered so much; it was so bad
            I don’t want even for a minute
            To feel that You are far from me

            I love You, I don’t get tired of telling You
            I love You, what I did was my mistake
            I love You, I will never leave You again
            I confess that I was born to praise You

            My heart is completely Yours
            My life belongs to You
            Your love for me is great, my God
            Now my life is transformed

            I don’t want to be far from You
            I’ve suffered so much; it was so bad
            I don’t want even for a minute
            To feel that You are far from mehttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_love_you_christ_my_crucified.php

      For the redeeming agony
      You suffered there on Calvary,
      For blood You shed and tears You cried,
      I love You, Christ my crucified.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_may_not_go_tonight_to_bethlehem.php







I may not go tonight to Bethlehem,
Nor follow star-directed ways, nor tread
The paths wherein the shepherds walked, that led
To Christ, and peace, and God’s good will to men.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_met_jesus_at_the_foot_of_the_cross.php







I met Jesus at the foot of the cross
When I was bound by sin;
Jesus met me, cleansed my heart of its dross,
He gave sweet peace within.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_must_have_the_savior_with_me.php







I must have the Savior with me,
For I dare not go alone,
I must feel His presence near me,
And His arm around me thrown.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_must_needs_go_home.php







I must needs go home by the way of the cross,
There’s no other way but this;
I shall ne’er get sight of the gates of light,
If the way of the cross I miss.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_must_share_jesus.php

      Chorus 1:
      I must share Jesus
      To all who will listen
      To all who are hungry and searching for His word, for His word
      I must share Jesus
      To all who are thirsting
      Till His life-giving water and healing power cover the earthhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_must_tell_jesus.php







I must tell Jesus all of my trials;
I cannot bear these burdens alone;
In my distress He kindly will help me;
He ever loves and cares for His own.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_need_not_trouble_for_the_morrow.php







I need not trouble for the morrow,
For I am in my Father’s care;
He will go with me as I journey,
For all my need He will prepare.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_need_thee_precious_jesus.php







I need Thee, precious Jesus,
For I am full of sin;
My soul is dark and guilty,
My heart is dead within.
I need the cleansing fountain
Where I can always flee,
The blood of Christ most precious,
The sinner’s perfect plea.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_need_to_be_filled.php







I need to be filled with the Spirit,
Each moment of every day,
I need to be filled in the morning,
Ere starting upon my way.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_never_knew_you.php
When the King in His beauty shall come to His throne,
    And around Him are gathered His loved ones, His own;
    There be some who will knock at His fair palace door,
    To be answered within, “There is mercy no more."https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_never_will_cease_to_love_him.php







For all the Lord has done for me,
I never will cease to love Him;
And for His grace so rich and free,
I never will cease to love Him.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_now_have_the_spirit_that_setteth_me_free.php

  I now have the Spirit that setteth me free,
  Hallelujah!
  My Savior’s own presence abideth with me,
  Hallelujah!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_offer_my_life_to_you.php
Lord I offer my life 
            to You
            Everything I’ve been through
            Use it for Your glory
            Lord I offer my days to You
            Lifting my praise to You
            As a pleasing sacrifice
            Lord I offer You my life

            Things in the past, things yet unseen
            Wishes and dreams that are yet to come true
            All of my hopes, all of my plans
            My heart and my hands are lifted to Youhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_once_was_a_stranger.php

    I once was a stranger to grace and to God,
    I knew not my danger, and felt not my load;
    Though friends spoke in rapture of Christ on the tree,
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_praised_the_earth.php
I praised the earth, in beauty seen,
            with garlands gay of various green;
            I praised the sea, whose ample field
            shone glorious as a silver shield--
            and earth and ocean seemed to say,
            "Our beauties are but for a day."

            I praised the sun, whose chariot rolled 
            on wheels of amber and of gold;
            I praised the moon, whose softer eye
            gleamed sweetly through the summer sky--
            and moon and sun in answer said,
            "Our days of light are numberèd."

            O God, O good beyond compare,
            if thus thy meaner works are fair,
            if thus thy beauties gild the span
            of ruined earth and sinful man,
            how glorious must the mansion be
            where thy redeemed shall dwell with thee!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_press_on.php

      Chorus:
      I press on toward the goal
      To win the prize for which God's called
      Heavenward to Christ Jesus
      I'm pressing on (pressing on)
      I press on toward the goal
      To win the prize for which God's called
      Heavenward to Christ Jesus
      I'm pressing onhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_release.php
There was a time in my life, 
      I thought I’d have to do it all for myself.
      I didn’t know the grace of God was sufficient,
      Didn’t know the Love of God was at hand.
      But now I can say, If you are discouraged,
      Strugglin’ just to make it through another day,
      You’ve got to let it go, let it all go,
      This is what you have to say: 
      I release and I let go, I let the Spirit run my life.
      And my heart is open wide, 
      Yes, I’m only here for God! 
      No more struggle, no more strife, 
      With my faith I see the light. 
      I am free in the Spirit, yes, I’m only here for God.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_remember_calvary.php

    Where He may lead me I will go,
    For I have learned to trust Him so,
    And I remember ’twas for me,
    That He was slain on Calvary.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_remember_when_my_burdens_rolled_away.php

    I remember when my burdens rolled away;
    I had carried them for years, night and day.
    When I sought the blessèd Lord,
    And I took Him at His word,
    Then at once all my burdens rolled away.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_rest_on_his_unbroken_promis.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_saw_a_bloodwashed_pilgrim.php







I saw a blood washed pilgrim, a sinner saved by grace,
Upon the King’s highway, with peaceful, shining face;
Temptations sore beset him, but nothing could afright;
He said, “The yoke is easy, the burden, it is light."https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_saw_a_wayworn_traveler.php







I saw a wayworn traveler, in tattered garments clad,
And struggling up the mountain, it seemed that he was sad;
His back was laden heavy, his strength was almost gone,
Yet he shouted as he journeyed, “Deliverance will come!"https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_saw_one_hanging_on_a_tree.php







I saw One hanging on a tree,
In agony and blood,
Who fixed His languid eyes on me,
As near His cross I stood.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_saw_one_weary.php







I saw one weary, sad, and torn,
With eager steps press on the way,
Who long the hallowed cross had borne,
Still looking for the promised day;
While many a line of grief and care,
Upon his brow, was furrowed there;
I asked what buoyed his spirits up,
“O this!" said he—“the blessèd hope."https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_saw_the_cross_of_jesus.php







I saw the cross of Jesus, when burdened with my sin;
I sought the cross of Jesus, to give me peace within;
I brought my soul to Jesus, He cleansed it in His blood;
And in the cross of Jesus I found my peace with God.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_saw_the_jewish_temple_purged.php

            1. I Saw The Jewish Temple Purged 
            While men of business, not of prayer
            Fled from the place, by terror urged 
            Jesus the Nazarene was there.

            2. I saw the solemn fun'ral train,
            The widowed mother's silent tear;
            When lo! she clasp her son again 
            The Nazarene had touched his bier.

            3. "Hadst thou been here he had not died."
            The weeping, doubting sister said,
            "Lazarus, come forth!" the Savior cried;
            The Nazarene restored their dead.

            4. I saw the crowds to fury giv'n;
            What could such mortal madness mean?
            Why imprecate the wrath of Heav'n?
            Why crucify the Nazarene?

            5. Silent the gentle sufferer stood,
            And pitying heard the frenzied cry;
            "On us and ours be all his blood "
            Jesus the Nazarene must die.

            6. How devils smiled when Jesus bled!
            Vain hope; they thought mankind were lost,
            When bowing low His gentle head,
            The Nazarene gave us the ghost.

            7. But when amazement reigned in hell,
            When Jesus, bursting from the grave,
            Bade to the world this myst'ry tell;
            'The Nazarene has died to save."

            8. I saw the world consumed in flame;
            The just from sin and sorrow free;
            The wicked sink in endless shame 
            Such was the Nazarene decree.

            9. I heard the trumpet long and loud;
            Then straight a godlike form was seen;
            He rode enthroned upon a cloud 
            'Twas the despised Nazarene.

            10. I heard the happy heav'nly throng
            Praise Him who bought them with His blood;
            I heard the everlasting song;
            "Jesus the Nazarene is God."https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_saw_the_light.php
I wandered so aimless
    My life filled with sin.
    I wouldn't let my
    Dear Saviour in.
    Then Jesus came like
    A stranger in the night
    Praise the Lord -,
    I saw the light.
    https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_saw_three_ships_come_sailing_in.php







I saw three ships come sailing in
On Christmas day, on Christmas day;
I saw three ships come sailing in
On Christmas day in the morning.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_say_to_all_men_far_and_near.php

  I say to all men far and near
  That He is risen again;
  That He is with us now and here,
  And ever shall remain.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_see_a_crimson_stream.php

  On Cal’vry’s hill of sorrow
  Where sin’s demands were paid,
  And rays of hope for tomorrow
  Across our path were laid.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_see_the_crowd_in_pilates_hall.php
I see the crowd in Pilate's hall,
            their furious cries I hear;
            their shouts of "Crucify!" appall,
            their curses fill mine ear.
            And of that shouting multitude
            I feel that I am one,
            and in that din of voices rude
            I recognize my own.

            I see the scourgers rend the flesh
            of God's belovèd Son;
            and as they smite I feel afresh
            that I of them am one.
            Around the Cross the throng I see
            that mock the Sufferer's groan,
            yet still my voice it seems to be,
            as if I mocked alone.

            'Twas I that shed that sacred Blood,
            I nailed him to the Tree,
            I crucified the Christ of God,
            I joined the mockery.
            Yet not the less that Blood avails
            to cleanse me from sin,
            and not the less that Cross prevails
            to give me peace within.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_send_the_joys_of_earth_away.php

  I send the joys of earth away;
  Away, ye tempters of the mind,
  False as the smooth, deceitful sea,
  And empty as the whistling wind.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_serve_a_risen_savior.php
I serve a risen Saviorhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_shall_be_no_stranger_there.php

        When the pearly gates are opened
        To a sinner “saved by grace,"
        When thro’ everlasting mercy,
        I behold my Savior’s face,
        When I enter in the mansions
        Of the city bright and fair,
        I shall have a royal welcome,
        For I’ll be no stranger there.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_shall_be_whiter_than_snow.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_shall_dwell_forever_there.php

  When the night is o’er and the shadows past,
  And eternal dawn dispels the gloom of earthly care;
  In the home of God I shall rest at last,
  In the land of Eden I shall dwell forever there.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_shall_not_bear_the_cross_thro_yon_city.php

  I shall not bear the cross thro’ yon city
  When the burdens of life are laid down.
  When I knock on the portals of Heaven
  I will trade the old cross for a crown.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_shall_not_die.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_shall_not_want.php







I shall not want: in deserts wild
Thou spread’st Thy table for Thy child;
While grace in streams for thirsting souls,
Thro’ earth and Heaven forever rolls.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_shall_see_the_king.php

        I shall see the King
        Where the angels sing;
        I shall see the King some day,
        In the better land,
        On the golden strand,
        And with Him shall ever stay.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_sin_i_once_had_wandered.php

                        In sin I once had wandered,
                        All weary, sad, and lone,
                        Till Jesus through His mercy
                        Adopted me His own.
                        E’er since I learned to trust Him,
                        His grace doth make me free,
                        And now I feel His pardon,
                        He’s everything to me.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_sing_the_birth_was_born_tonight.php







I sing the birth was born tonight,
The Author both of life and light;
The angels so did sound it,
And like the ravished shepherds said,
Who saw the light, and were afraid,
Yet searched, and true they found it.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_sing_the_mighty_power_of_god.php







I sing the mighty power of God, that made the mountains rise,
[https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_stand_amazed_in_the_presence.php







I stand amazed in the presence
Of Jesus the Nazarene,
And wonder how He could love me,
A sinner, condemned, unclean.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_stand_in_awe_of_you.php
You are 
                beautiful beyond description,https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_stand_redeemed.php

          When i think of all my faults and my failures
          When i consider all the times i've let God down
          I am humbled by hte grace He has extended 
          I'm amazed at the mercy I have found
          I could never earn His love on my own
          Yet every time I come before His throne

          Chorus:
          I stand redeemed by the blood of the Lamb
          I stand redeemed before the great I am
          When He looks at me, I sees the nail scarred hands 
          That bought my liberty
          I stand redeemed

          Even at my best I am unworthy
          I have nothing precious i can give
          A broken life is all I have to offer
          And yet it's a priceless gift to Him
          The bitter mark of sin will never fade away 
          But i can come before Him unashamed

          *repeat Chorushttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_still_dont_understand_it.php

      You became a man
      As part of a loving and perfect plan, you died
      The earth turned to darkness, creation cried; You lived,
      You arose from the grave, and the love You give to a man like me
      Is so hard to comprehend
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_still_have_joy.php

            I’ve been tested
            My faith has been tried
            Satan has attempted
            To destroy my life
            He’s robbed, abused
            Accused and stolen
            He’s done everything he could do
            To conquer my soul

            But I still have joy
            I still have joy
            After all I’ve been through
            I still have joy (2x)

            Friends have left me
            They’ve questioned my faith
            The good I tried to do
            Was thrown back in my face
            The hurt and the pain
            Brought tears to my eyes
            But God has replaced a blessing
            For every tear I’ve cried

            I still have peace
            I still have peace
            After all I’ve been through
            I still have peace (2x)

            I still have His love
            I still have His love
            After all I’ve been through
            I still have His love (2x)https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_think_when_i_read_that_sweet_story_of_old.php







I think, when I read that sweet story of old,
When Jesus was here among men,
How He called little children as lambs to His fold,
I should like to have been with them then.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_thirst_thou_wounded_lamb_of_god.php







I thirst, Thou wounded Lamb of God,
To wash me in Thy cleansing blood,
To dwell within Thy wounds; then pain
Is sweet, and life or death is gain.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_thought_upon_the_days_of_old.php

  I thought upon the days of old,
  The years departed long,
  I held communion with my heart,
  By night recalled my song.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_to_the_hills_will_lift_my_eyes.php

  I to the hills will lift my eyes;
  O whence shall come my aid?
  My help is from the Lord alone,
  Who Heav’n and earth has made.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_try_and_try_again.php

            1. I Try, and Try Again
            To publish Jesus' worth,
            And fain I would, but never can,
            Set half His riches forth.

            2. The love His bosom feels,
            His tongue alone can tell;
            And till the Lord this love reveal,
            None understand it well.

            3. 'Tis deep, unfathomed love,
            And charms the hosts on high,
            Yet will in man no wonder move,
            Without an opened eye.

            4. His blood, so freely split,
            Is loud proclaim to all,
            Rich balm to heal the deepest guilt,
            Yet few regard the call.

            5. Sweet health His grace imparts,
            And grace divinely free;
            Rich grace to cleanse the foulest heart,
            Yet few say, "Give it me."

            6. Some footsteps of thy grace
            My tutored heart can find,
            And view some of thy face,
            And yet I'm almost blind.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_understand.php

      Thank you Jesus for saving my soul 
      Thank you Lord for inviting 
      You're preparing my heavenly goal 
      Hardly wait, so exciting 
      Now I'm part of the family 
      This is something to live for 
      You're provide my liberty 
      Making me want to give more
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_vow_to_thee_my_country.php

  I vow to thee, my country—all earthly things above—
  Entire and whole and perfect, the service of my love;
  The love that asks no question, the love that stands the test,
  That lays upon the altar the dearest and the best;
  The love that never falters, the love that pays the price,
  The love that makes undaunted the final sacrifice.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_waited_for_the_lord_most_high.php

  I waited for the Lord most high,
  And He inclined to hear my cry;
  He took me from destruction’s pit
  And from the miry clay;
  Upon a rock he set my feet,
  And steadfast made my way.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_waited_for_the_lord_my_god.php

  I waited for the Lord my God,
  Yea, patiently drew near,
  And He at length inclined to me,
  My pleading cry to hear.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_walk_in_danger_all_the_way.php

            1. I walk in danger all the way.
            The thought shall never leave me
            That Satan, who has marked his prey,
            Is plotting to deceive me.
            This foe with hidden snares
            May seize me unawares
            If e'er I fail to watch and pray.
            I walk in danger all the way.
            https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_walk_the_kings_highway.php

    I know not where the road will lead
    I follow day by day,
    Or where it ends: I only know
    I walk the King’s highway.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_walk_with_love_along_the_way.php

        I walk with Love along the way,
        And O, it is a holy day;
        No more I suffer cruel fear,
        I feel God’s presence with me here;
        The joy that none can take away
        Is mine; I walk with Love today.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_walk_with_the_king.php

      In sorrow I wandered, my spirit oppressed,
      But now I am happy—securely I rest;
      From morning till evening glad carols I sing,
      And this is the reason—I walk with the King.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_wandered_in_the_shades_of_night.php

      I wandered in the shades of night,
      Till Jesus came to me,
      And with the sunlight of His love
      Bid all my darkness flee.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_wandered_sore_distressed.php

        I wandered sore distressed,
        All weary and forlorn;
        I had no place to rest,
        Of all my pleasures shorn—
        My thirsting spirit sighed,
        And in the desert cried.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_wanna_know_more.php

      I知 gonna know more than I know now (more than I know now)https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_wanna_know_why.php

      Chorus:
      I wanna know why (I wanna know why), oh why (Oh Lord), I always seem to 
      fall
      Why (I wanna know why), oh why (Oh Lord), I can't find my way
      Tell my why (I wanna know why), oh Lord, You sent Your Son to die
      He washed my sins away at Calvary
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_wanna_love_you.php

      I wanna love You regardless if anyone else does
      I wanna serve You even if I'm all alone
      Though others forsake You I wanna give you my faith and trust
      Faithfully follow everywhere You gohttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_want_a_faith.php

      I want a faith
      I want a faith that moves mountains and Satan can not shake (faith that 
      mountains can not shake)
      When I'm tempted or tested, my love he'll never take (he can never take)
      I want a prayer that is answered by heaven in its turn (prayer answered in 
      its turn)
      To receive words from Christians, whose laws are His concern
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_want_a_principle_within.php

        I want a principle within of watchful, godly fear,
        A sensibility of sin, a pain to feel it near.
        I want the first approach to feel of pride or wrong desire,
        To catch the wandering of my will, and quench the kindling fire.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_want_jesus_to_walk_with_me.php

      I want Jesus to walk with me
      I want Jesus to walk with me:
      All along life's pilgrim journey
      I want Jesus to walk with mehttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_want_the_spir't_of_power_within.php

            I want the Spir't of power within,
            Of love, and of a healthful mind:
            Of power, to conquer inbred sin;
            Of love, to thee and all mankind;
            Of health, that pain and death defies,
            Most vigorous when the body dies.

            When shall I hear the inward voice
            Which only faithful souls can hear?
            Pardon, and peace, and heavenly joys
            Attend the promised Comforter:
            O come, and righteousness divine,
            And Christ, and all with Christ, are mine!

            O that the Comforter would come,
            Nor visit as a transient guest,
            But fix in me his constant home,
            And take possession of my breast,
            And fix in me his loved abode,
            The temple of indwelling God!

            Come, Holy Ghost, my heart inspire,
            Attest that I am born again!
            Come, and baptise me now with fire,
            Nor let thy former gifts be vain;
            I cannot rest in sins forgiven -
            Where is the earnest of my heaven?

            Where the indubitable seal
            That ascertains the kingdom mine,
            The powerful stamp I long to feel,
            The signature of love divine?
            O shed it in my heart abroad -
            Fullness of love, of heaven, of God!
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_want_to_be_a_worker.php

        I want to be a worker for the Lord,
        I want to love and trust His holy Word,
        I want to sing and pray,
        Be busy every day
        In the vineyard of the Lord.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_want_to_be_faithful.php
I want to be faithful 
            to You
            I want to be true, Lord
            Whatever You say I will do
            I will obeyhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_want_to_be_just_like_you.php

      He climbs in my lap for a goodnight hug
      He calls me dad and I call him bug
      Faded old pillow and a bear named pooh
      He snuggles up close and says, "I wanna be like you"https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_want_to_be_like_him.php

      Nobody else but Jesus
      Nobody else will dohttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_want_to_be_like_jesus.php
1
          I have one deep, supreme desire,
          that I may be like Jesus.
          To this I fervently aspire,
          that I may be like Jesus.
          I want my heart His throne to be,
          so that a watching world may see
          His likeness shining forth in me.
          I want to be like Jesus.


          2
          He spent His life in doing good;
          I want to be like Jesus.
          In lowly paths of service trod;
          I want to be like Jesus.
          He sympathised with hearts distressed,
          He spoke the words that cheered and blessed,
          He welcomed sinners to His breast.
          I want to be like Jesus.


          3
          A holy, harmless life He led;
          I want to be like Jesus.
          The Father’s will, His drink and bread;
          I want to be like Jesus.
          And when at last He comes to die,
          “Forgive them, Father," hear Him cry
          for those who taunt and crucify.
          I want to be like Jesus.


          4
          O perfect life of Christ, my Lord!
          I want to be like Jesus.
          My recompense and my reward,
          that I may be like Jesus.
          His Spirit fill my hungering soul,
          His power all my life control.
          My deepest prayer, my highest goal,
          that I may be like Jesus.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_want_to_be_where_you_are.php
I want to be where You 
            are
            Dwelling in Your presence
            Feasting at Your table
            Surrounded by Your glory
            In Your presence
            That’s where I always want to be
            I just want to be
            I just want to be with You

            I just want to be where You are
            To enter boldly in Your presence
            I don’t want to worship from afar
            Draw me near to where You are
            O my God, You are my strength and my song!
            And when I’m in Your presence
            Though I’m weak You are always stronghttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_want_to_know_more_about_my_lord.php

      While travelling through this world of sorrow
      I'm on my way to gloryland
      I'll not turn back for some tomorrow
      My trials here I'll understandhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_want_to_praise_him.php

      Chorus:
      I want to praise Him, I want to praise Him
      Praising the name of the one proclaimed His love
      I will rejoice in Him, I will rejoice in Himhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_was_a_wandering_sheep.php

        I was a wandering sheep,
        I did not love the fold;
        I did not love my Shepherd’s voice,
        I would not be controlled.
        I was a wayward child,
        I did not love my home;
        I did not love my Father’s voice,
        I loved afar to roam.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_was_lost_in_sin_when_jesus_found_me.php

        I was lost in sin when Jesus found me,
        But He rescued me, all glory to His Name!
        And the cords of worldly pleasure bound me,
        Till He saved me from sin and shame.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_was_made_a_christian.php

        I was made a Christian
        When my name was giv’n,
        One of God’s dear children,
        And an heir of heaven.
        In the name of Christian
        I will glory now,
        Evermore remember
        My baptismal vow.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_was_made_to_praise_you.php

            I was made to praise You
            I was made to glorify Your name
            In every circumstance 
            To find a chance to thank You 
            I was made to love You
            I was made to worship at Your feet
            And to obey You Lord
            I was made for You 
            I will always praise You
            I will always glorify Your name 
            In every circumstance 
            I’ll find a chance to thank You
            I will always love You
            I will always worship at Your feet
            And I’ll obey You Lord 
            I was made for You (2x)https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_was_once_a_sinner.php

          I was once a sinner, but I came
          Pardon to receive from my Lord:
          This was freely given, and I found
          That He always kept His word.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_was_sinking_deep_in_sin.php

            I was sinking deep in sin, far from the peaceful shore,
            Very deeply stained within, sinking to rise no more,
            But the Master of the sea, heard my despairing cry,
            From the waters lifted me, now safe am I.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_was_there_when_it_happened.php

              You ask me how I know that Jesus saves me,
              How I know that all my sins are white as snow;
              You ask me how I know that He forgave me;
              Now listen, I must tell you how I know.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_was_wandering_and_weary.php

              I was wandering and weary
              When my Savior came unto me;
              For the ways of sin grew dreary,
              And the world has ceased to woo me;
              And I thought I heard Him say,
              As He came along His way,https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_be_here.php

      I will be here, I will be here
      I will be here, I will be here
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_call.php
Christian 
lyrics online will lead you to thousands of lyrics to hymns, choruses, worship 
songs and gospel recordings. Free Christian hymn lyrics include popular hymns, 
both new and old, traditional and modern, as well as rare and hard-to-find 
hymns. We have been online since 2004 and have reached over 1 million people in 
over 150 countries worldwide. In 2007, this site became the largest Christian 
lyrics site on the entire internet. 

© 2011
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_call_upon_the_lord.php
I will 
                call upon the Lord, (I will call upon the Lord,)https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_change_your_name.php
I will 
                change your name.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_climb_up_mount_sinai.php
That He is Mighty you 
            can not touch His fire
            He will devour the evil in your land
            He will exalt you with His wondrous hand
            For all the world to see

            I will climb up Mount Sinai
            And I will receive God's holy sign
            To make my whole life shine His light
            For all the world to seehttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_do_my_part.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_early_seek_the_savior.php

        I will early seek the Savior,
        I will learn of Him each day;
        I will follow in His footsteps,
        I will walk the narrow way.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_ever_sing_thy_praises.php

              I will ever sing Thy praises,
              Mighty God and gracious King;
              Loud my heart its tribute raises,
              And to Thee my psalms I sing;
              Thou art King of all creation,
              Every land and every nation;
              “Thousand, thousand thanks to Thee,
              Mighty God," my song shall be!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_extol_thee_o_my_god.php

        I will extol Thee, O my God, and praise Thee, O my King;
        Yea, every day and evermore Thy praises will I sing.
        Great is the Lord, our mighty God, and greatly to be praised;
        His greatness is unsearchable, above all glory raised.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_follow_him.php
I will follow him,
                Follow him where ever he may go
                And near him I always will be,
                For nothing can keep me away;
                He is my destiny.
                I will follow him.
                Ever since he touched my heart I knew
                There isn't an ocean too deep,
                A mountain so high it can keep,
                Keep me away,
                Away from his love
                https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_follow_thee.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_go_in_the_strength_of_the_lord.php

              I will go in the strength of the Lord,
              In the path He hath marked for my feet:
              I will follow the light of His Word,
              Nor shrink from the dangers I meet.
              His presence my steps shall attend:
              His fullness my wants shall supply;
              On Him, till my journey shall end,
              My hope shall securely rely.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_i_will.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_lift_up_my_eyes.php

            I will lift up my eyes to the mountains
            From whence shall my help come
            My help comes from the Lord
            Who made heaven and earth

            1. He will not allow your foot to slip
                He who keeps you will not slumber
                Behold, He who keeps Israel
                Will neither slumber nor sleep (chorus)

            2. The Lord is your keeper
                The Lord is your shade on your right hand
                The sun will not smite you by day
                Nor the moon by night (chorus)

            3. The Lord will protect you from all evil
                He will keep your soul, the Lord will guard
                Your going out and your coming in
                From this time forth and forever (chorus)
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_make_the_darkness_light.php

              I will make the darkness light before thee,
              What is wrong I値l make it right before thee,
              All thy battles I will fight before thee,
              And the high place I値l bring down.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_meet_you_in_the_morning.php

              I will meet you in the morning,
              Just inside the Eastern Gate.
              Then be ready, faithful pilgrim,
              Lest with you it be too late.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_never_turn_back.php

                Once I wandered in darkness unsaved,
                Till the Savior came knocking at my heart,
                And I opened the door, let Him in,
                Now rich blessings to me He imparts.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_no_longer_doubt_thee.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_not_be_afraid.php

                I will not be afraid, I will not be afraid;
                I will look upward, and travel onward,
                And not be afraid.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_not_forget_thee.php

                Sweet is the promise “I will not forget thee,"
                Nothing can molest or turn my soul away;
                E’en though the night be dark within the valley,
                Just beyond is shining an eternal day.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_pass_over_you.php

                When God of old the way of life
                Would teach to all His own,
                He placed them safe beyond the reach
                Of death, by Blood alone.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_praise_him.php

                When I saw the cleansing fountain
                Open wide for all my sin,
                I obeyed the Spirit’s wooing,
                When He said, “Wilt thou be clean?"https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_praise_the_lord.php

      Praise the Lord, sing praise to the Lord
      Praise the Lord, sing praise to the Lord
      Praise the Lord, sing praise to the Lordhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_rise.php

      He'll make us broken bread and poured out wine
      Just to feed the needs of them
      If we bow on bended knee before the Lord (oh Lord)
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_rise_up.php

      I will rise up and call you blessed
      I will stand up and sing your praise
      I will kneel down before your altar
      I will bow down before your throne
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_serve_thee.php
Christian 
lyrics online will lead you to thousands of lyrics to hymns, choruses, worship 
songs and gospel recordings. Free Christian hymn lyrics include popular hymns, 
both new and old, traditional and modern, as well as rare and hard-to-find 
hymns. We have been online since 2004 and have reached over 1 million people in 
over 150 countries worldwide. In 2007, this site became the largest Christian 
lyrics site on the entire internet. 

© 2011
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_sing.php

      Oh what love have I found in my Savior
      He's my Lord and the master of all (master of all)
      I will love Him throughout all the ages
      'Cause I've served Him and answered His call
      And since I've whipped old Satan (escaped the roar), espcaped the lion's 
      roar
      I'll be at home with Jesus (with Him) to sing forevermore
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_sing_my_makers_praises.php

                I will sing my Maker’s praises and in Him most joyful be,
                For in all things I see traces of His tender love to me.
                Nothing else than love could move Him with such sweet and tender 
                care
                Evermore to raise and bear all who try to serve and love Him.
                All things else have but their day, God’s great love abides for 
                aye.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_sing_of_jesus_love.php

                I will sing of Jesus’ love,
                Sing of Him Who first loved me;
                For He left bright worlds above,
                And died on Calvary.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_sing_of_my_redeemer.php

                I will sing of my Redeemer,
                And His wondrous love to me;
                On the cruel cross He suffered,
                From the curse to set me free.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_sing_the_wondrous_story.php

                I will sing the wondrous story
                Of the Christ Who died for me.
                How He left His home in glory
                For the cross of Calvary.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_sing_you_a_song_of_that_beautiful_land.php

                I will sing you a song of that beautiful land,
                The far away home of the soul,
                Where no storms ever beat on the glittering strand,
                While the years of eternity roll,
                While the years of eternity roll;
                Where no storms ever beat on the glittering strand,
                While the years of eternity roll.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_speak_your_name.php

      Chorus:
      I will speak Your name when the storm is raging
      I will speak Your name when the sea is calm
      I will speak Your name when my fears o'ertake me
      And forever on my lips I will speak Your namehttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_tell_it_to_jesus_my_lord.php

        When times of temptation bring sadness and gloom,
        I will tell it to Jesus my Lord;
        The last of earth’s treasures borne out to the tomb,
        I will tell it to Jesus my Lord.
        This earth hath no sorrow
        For today or tomorrow,
        But Jesus hath known it and felt long ago,
        And when it comes o’er me,
        And I’m tempted so sorely,
        I will tell it to Jesus my Lord.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_tell_the_wondrous_story.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_trade_the_old_cross_for_a_crown.php

                I shall not bear the cross thro’ yon city
                When the burdens of life are laid down.
                When I knock on the portals of Heaven
                I will trade the old cross for a crown.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_will_i_will.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_with_thee_would_begin.php

                I with Thee would begin, O my Savior so dear,
                On the way that I still must pursue;
                I with Thee would begin every day granted here,
                As my earnest resolve I renew
                To be and remain Thine forever.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_wonder_as_i_wander.php

            I wonder as I wander
            out under the sky,
            how Jesus the Saviour
            did come for to die
            for poor ord'n'ry people
            like you and like I.
            I wonder as I wander
            out under the sky.

            When Mary birthed Jesus,
            'twas in a cow's stall
            with wise men and farmers
            and shepherds and all.
            But high from God's heaven
            a star's light did fall,
            and the promise of ages
            it did then recall.

            If Jesus had wanted
            for any wee thing,
            a star in the sky,
            or a bird on the wing,
            or all of God's angels
            in heav'n for to sing,
            he surely could have it,
            'cause he was the King.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_worship_thee_most_gracious_god.php

                I worship Thee, most gracious God,
                And all Thy ways adore;
                And every day I live, I seem
                To love Thee more and more.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_worship_thee_o_holy_ghost.php

                I worship Thee, O Holy Ghost,
                I love to worship Thee;
                My risen Lord for aye were lost
                But for Thy company.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_worship_thee_sweet_will_of_god.php

        I worship thee, sweet will of God,
        And all thy ways adore;
        And every day I live, I long
        To love thee more and more.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_worship_thee_lord_jesus.php
I worship thee, Lord Jesus,
            as children did of old,
            who sang within thy temple
            hosannas manifold.

            I worship thee, Lord Jesus,
            who, on thine altar laid,
            in this most awful service,
            our food and drink art made.

            I worship thee, Lord Jesus, 
            who in thy love divine,
            art hiding here thy Godhead
            in forms of bread and wine.

            I worship thee, Lord Jesus,
            and kneeling unto thee,
            as thou didst come to Mary,
            I pray thee come to me.

            I worship thee, Lord Jesus,
            my King and Savior mild:
            thou hast blessed other children;
            bless also me, thy child.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_would_be_closer.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_would_be_like_jesus.php

                Earthly pleasures vainly call me;
                I would be like Jesus;
                Nothing worldly shall enthrall me;
                I would be like Jesus.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_would_be_true.php

                I would be true, for there are those who trust me;
                I would be pure, for there are those who care;
                I would be strong, for there is much to suffer;
                I would be brave, for there is much to dare;
                I would be brave, for there is much to dare.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_would_be_dear_savior_wholly_thine.php

                I would be, dear Savior, wholly Thine;
                Teach me how, teach me how;
                I would do Thy will, O Lord, not mine;
                Help me, help me now.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_would_but_cannot_sing.php

        I would, but cannot sing,
        Guilt has untuned my voice;
        The serpent sin’s envenomed sting
        Has poisoned all my joys.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_would_but_cannot_sing.php

        I would, but cannot sing,
        Guilt has untuned my voice;
        The serpent sin’s envenomed sting
        Has poisoned all my joys.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_would_draw_nearer_to_jesus.php

                I would draw nearer to Jesus,
                In His sweet presence abide,
                Constantly trying to serve Him,
                Safe and secure at His side.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_would_not_be_denied.php

                When pangs of death seized on my soul,
                Unto the Lord I cried;
                Till Jesus came and made me whole,
                I would not be denied.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_would_not_live_alway.php

        I would not live alway; I ask not to stay
        Where storm after storm rises dark o’er the way;
        The few lurid mornings that dawn on us here
        Are enough for life’s woes, full enough for its cheer.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/id_rather_have_jesus.php



I’d rather have Jesus than silver or gold;
I’d rather be His than have riches untold;
I’d rather have Jesus than houses or lands;
I’d rather be led by His nail-pierced hand
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/id_rather_live_by_the_side_of_the_road.php
There are people who would rather live 
                in splendor
                And brag about their silver and their gold,
                And people who would trade God's promise
                For its glory to hold;
                There are people who would rather live in mansions,
                There are people who would rather live abroad,
                But I'd rather have a little log cabin
                By the side of the road.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_any_man_hear.php

                If any man now will hear the voice
                Of Christ, and say,
                “Dear Savior, come in and dwell with me,
                Come in, I pray."https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_i_asked_whereon_i_rest_my_claim.php

                If asked whereon I rest my claim
                To full salvation’s joy,
                If nothing more I need to name,
                Or other words employ,
                Besides our Savior’s blood and wounds,
                To me all-satisfying grounds;
                I answer then, “My claim is good!
                ’Tis based on Jesus’ blood."https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_christ_is_mine.php

                If Christ is mine, then all is mine,
                And more than angels know;
                Both present things and things to come,
                And grace and glory, too.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_christ_should_come_tonight.php

                If our Lord should come tonight,
                With the bright angelic host,
                Would He find us in His vineyard,
                Every servant at his post?
                Thro’ the precious cleansing blood,
                Are our garments clean and white?
                Are we dwelling in the light,
                Should our Lord appear tonight?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_death_my_freind_and_i_divide.php

                  If death my friend and me divide,
                  Thou dost not, Lord, my sorrow chide,
                  Or frown my tears to see;
                  Restrained from passionate excess,
                  Thou bidst me mourn in calm distress
                  For them that rest in Thee.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_ever_it_could_come_to_pass.php

            If ever it could come to pass, 
            That sheep of Christ might fall away,
            My fickle, feeble soul, alas ! 
            Would fall a thousand times a day; 
            Were not thy love as firm as free, 
            Thou soon wouldst take it, Lord, from me. 

            I on thy promises depend; 
            At least I to depend desire; 
            That thou wilt love me to the end, 
            Be with me in temptation's fire; 
            Wilt for me work, and in me too, 
            And guide me right and bring me through. 

            No other stay have I beside; 
            If these can alter, I must fall; 
            I look to thee to be supplied 
            With life, with will, with power, with all. 
            Rich souls may glory in their store, 
            But Jesus will relieve the poor.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_god_had_not_been_on_our_side.php

                    If God had not been on our side
                    And had not come to aid us,
                    The foes with all their power and pride
                    Would surely have dismayed us;
                    For we, His flock, would have to fear
                    The threat of men both far and near
                    Who rise in might against us.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_god_himself_be_for_me.php

                  If God Himself be for me, I may a host defy,
                  For when I pray, before me my foes confounded fly.
                  If Christ, the Head, befriend me, if God be my support,
                  The mischief they intend me shall quickly come to naught.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_god_is_mine.php

            1. If God is Mine, Then Present Things
            And things to come are mine;
            Yea, Christ, His Word, and Spirit too,
            And glory all divine.

            2. If he is mine, then from His love
            He ev'ry trouble sends;
            All things are working for my good,
            And bliss his rod attends.

            3. If he is mine, I need not fear
            The rage of earth and hell;
            He will support my trembling hope,
            Their utmost force repel.

            4.If he is mine, let friends forsake,
            Let wealth and honor flee 
            Sure he who giveth me Himself,
            Is more than wealth to me.

            5. If he is mine, I'll boldly pass
            Through death's tremendous vale;
            He is a solid comfort when
            All others comforts fail.

            6. O, tell me, Lord! that thou are mine;
            What can I wish beside?
            My soul would at the fountain live,
            When all the streams are dried.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_human_kindness_meets_return.php

                    If human kindness meets return,
                    And owns the grateful tie;
                    If tender thoughts within us burn
                    To feel a friend is nigh;
                    O shall not warmer accents tell
                    The gratitude we owe
                    To Him Who died, our fears to quell,
                    Our more than orphan’s woe!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_i_asked_whereon_i_rest_my_claim.php

                If asked whereon I rest my claim
                To full salvation’s joy,
                If nothing more I need to name,
                Or other words employ,
                Besides our Savior’s blood and wounds,
                To me all-satisfying grounds;
                I answer then, “My claim is good!
                ’Tis based on Jesus’ blood."https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_i_come_to_jesus.php

                      If I come to Jesus,
                      He will make me glad;
                      He will give me pleasure
                      When my heart is sad.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_i_could_hear_my_mother_pray_again.php



How sweet and happy seem those days of which I dream,
When memory recalls them now and then!
And with what rapture sweet my weary heart would beat,
If I could hear my mother pray again.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_i_gained_the_world.php

                    If I gained the world, but lost the Savior,
                    Were my life worth living for a day?
                    Could my yearning heart find rest and comfort
                    In the things that soon must pass away?
                    If I gained the world, but lost the Savior,
                    Would my gain be worth the lifelong strife?
                    Are all earthly pleasures worth comparing
                    For a moment with a Christ-filled life?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_i_have_wounded_any_soul_today.php

                    If I have wounded any soul today,
                    If I have caused one foot to go astray,
                    If I have walked in my own willful way,
                    Dear Lord, forgive!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_i_walk_in_the_pathway_of_duty.php

                        If I walk in the pathway of duty,
                        If I work till the close of the day;
                        I shall see the great King in His beauty,
                        When I’ve gone the last mile of the way.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_jesus_goes_with_me.php



It may be in the valley, where countless dangers hide;
It may be in the sunshine that I, in peace, abide;
But this one thing I know—if it be dark or fair,
If Jesus is with me, I’ll go anywhere!
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_jesus_leads_this_army.php

                          If Jesus leads this army,
                          We will outshine the sun,
                          We will outshine the sun,
                          We will outshine the sun;
                          If Jesus leads this army,
                          We will outshine the sun,
                          And we値l walk the golden streets on high.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_on_a_quiet_sea.php

                            If, on a quiet sea, toward Heaven we calmly sail,
                            With grateful hearts, O God, to Thee,
                            We’ll own the favoring gale,
                            With grateful hearts, O God, to Thee,
                            We’ll own the favoring gale.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_our_lord_should_come_tonight.php

                            If our Lord should come tonight,
                            With the bright angelic host,
                            Would He find us in His vineyard,
                            Every servant at his post?
                            Thro’ the precious cleansing blood,
                            Are our garments clean and white?
                            Are we dwelling in the light,
                            Should our Lord appear tonight?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_pathless_forests_meet_my_view.php

                              If pathless forests meet my view,
                              I will not doubt or fear;
                              What has been done that I can do,
                              My way shall be made clear.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_the_dark_shadows_gather.php

                              If the dark shadows gather as you go along,
                              Do not grieve for their coming; sing a cheery 
                              song.
                              There is joy for the taking; it will soon be 
                              light.
                              Ev’ry cloud wears a rainbow if your heart keeps 
                              right.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_the_light_has_gone_out.php



When the sun of your life has gone down,
And the clouds in the west turn to gold,
Endless death will to you then have come,
If the light has gone out in your soul.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_the_world_from_you_withhold.php

                              If the world from you withhold of its silver and 
                              its gold,
                              And you have to get along with meager fare,
                              Just remember, in His Word, how He feeds the 
                              little bird;
                              Take your burden to the Lord and leave it there.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_there_be_to_skills_that_reckon.php

                              If there be that skills to reckon
                              All the number of the blest,
                              He perchance can weigh the gladness
                              Of the everlasting rest,
                              Which, their earthly exile finished,
                              They by merit have possessed.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_there_were_no_god.php

      If there were no God there would be no music
      There would be no dream to be dreaming of
      What a dreadful thought of an empty future
      If there were no God there would be no lovehttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_there_were_no_god2.php

      If there were no You
      If there were no Youhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_thou_but_suffer_god_to_guide_thee.php
If thou but suffer God to guide thee
            and hope in him through all thy ways,
            he'll give thee strength, whate'er betide thee,
            and bear thee through the evil days.
            who trusts in God's unchanging love
            builds on the rock that naught can move.
            https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_thou_shalt_confess.php

  O lost one in the wilds of sin,
  So long from God away;
  Before thee lies an open path,
  Where thou canst walk today.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_thy_beloved_son_o_god.php

            1. If Thy beloved Son, O God,
            Had not to earth descended
            And in our mortal flesh and blood
            Had not sin's power ended,
            Then this poor, wretched soul of mine
            In hell eternally would pine
            Because of its transgression.
            https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_to_christ_our_only_king.php

    If to Christ our only King
    Men redeemed we strive to bring,
    Just one way this may be done—
    We must win them one by one.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_tonight_should_end_the_world.php

    In God’s Word it is recorded
    That this world will not endure;
    Then while time is yet afforded
    Make your hope of Heaven sure;
    For the stars, before the morning,
    From their orbits may be hurled,
    And the moon may send a warning
    That tonight will end the world.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_we_brightly_shine.php

    If we brightly shine, if we sweetly smile,
    We will help to shorten each long mile;
    If we speak the words of love and cheer
    Happy days will make a happy year.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_we_have_forgotten_the_name_of_our_god.php

      If we have forgotten the Name of our God,
      Or unto an idol our hands spread abroad,
      Shall not the Almighty uncover this sin?
      He knows all our hearts and the secrets within.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_we_never_meet_again.php

      Soon we'll come to the end of life's journey
      And perhaps we'll never meet anymore
      'Til we gather in heaven's bright city
      Far away on that beautiful shorehttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_you_are_tired_of_the_load_of_your_sin.php

      If you are tired of the load of your sin,
      Let Jesus come into your heart;
      If you desire a new life to begin,
      Let Jesus come into your heart.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_you_ask.php

      Chorus:
      If you ask it will be given to you
      Seek, you will find
      Knock on my door, it will open for you
      I am here, you need to try
      I'm the God of Utmost Highhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_you_came_back_from_heaven.php
I wouldn't know what to say, I wouldn't know what to do, If you came back from Heaven, And I could look at you. Would I fumble for the words? Would I be a little shy? Would I bust right out with laughter? Or break right down and cry?   Oh, if you came back from Heaven, Would it be like it was then? Could we just pick up, where we left off, And try it all again? Oh, if you came back from Heaven, It would freeze me in my tracks. And I hope God knows, if he let you go, I'd never send you back.  Do your kisses feel the same? Do you still have the same touch? And will you whisper softly, 'Cos you've missed me so much? Have you heard all my prayers, When I lay down at night? And did you feel my body, When I held your pillow tight?   Oh, if you came back from Heaven, Would it be like it was then? Could we just pick up, where we left off, And try it all again? Oh, if you came back from Heaven, It would freeze me in my tracks. And I hope God knows, if he let you go, I'd never send you back.  And if, God forbid,  You leave this Earth again while I see. I hope he knows, if you go, You'll be bringing me. Oh, if you came back from Heaven, Would it be like it was then? Could we just pick up, where we left off, And try it all again?   Oh, if you came back from Heaven, It would freeze me in my tracks. And I hope God knows, if he let you go, I'd never send you back.  I hope God knows, if he let you go, I'd never send you back. https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_you_cannot_on_the_ocean.php

      If you cannot, on the ocean, sail among the swiftest fleet,
      Rocking on the highest billows, laughing at the storms you meet,
      You can stand among the sailors, anchored yet within the bay,
      You can lend a hand to help them, as they launch their boats away.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_you_miss_me.php

      If you miss me from-a (x10)
      If you miss me down here
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_you_will.php



You may know this day that your sins are gone,
If you’ll come to Christ and forsake the wrong,
If you will repent, from the heart forgive;
Do obey, believe Him, sinner, look and live.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_you_will_only_let_god_guide_you.php

  If you will only let God guide you,
  And hope in Him through all your ways,
  Whatever comes, He’ll stand beside you,
  To bear you through the evil days;
  Who trusts in God’s unchanging love
  Builds on the Rock that cannot move.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_you_would_be_a_pillar.php



If you would be a pillar in the church of God,
You must overcome the world,
You must overcome the world;
Die to fame and reputation, take the path that Jesus trod,
If you would be a pillar in the church of God.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_you_would_come_after_me.php

        If you would come after Me, to your self say no;
        Take your cross up daily; follow Me alone.
        If you try to save your life, you will not succeed.
        You must lose your self for Me; then you値l find life indeed.
        What good will it be for you to gain the world as a whole,
        If the end result is losing your own soul?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_your_heart_keeps_right.php

      If the dark shadows gather as you go along,
      Do not grieve for their coming; sing a cheery song.
      There is joy for the taking; it will soon be light.
      Ev’ry cloud wears a rainbow if your heart keeps right.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/if_youre_own_your_way_to_heaven.php

            If you're on your way to heaven clap your hands,
            If your sins have been forgiven, clap your hands
            Point to Heaven in the sky,
            Then shake hands with one nearby,
            If the Lord can satisfy
            Clap your hands, clap your hands
            If you're on your way to heaven clap your hands,

            If you're not ashamed of Jesus, raise your hand.
            If you've taken you stand for Jesus take your stand.
            Now sit down and rest a while
            Turn to someone with a smile
            If your happy all the while
            Clap your hands, clap your hands
            If you're on your way to heaven clap your hands,
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ignorance_aint_bliss.php

      Spoken)
      This is a song about perceptions, paradigms, and politics
      Borne out of the prejudices that plague us as a people
      Get the point?
      Then lets proceed...
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ill_always_be_sure.php

      Well I'm happy today
      I'm servin' Jesus all the way
      Never have I felt so secure
      And when Jesus is my friend
      He will help me through the end
      No doubting, yes I'll always be sure
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ill_be_a_friend_to_jesus.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ill_be_obedient.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ill_be_a_sunbeam.php

      Jesus wants me for a sunbeam,
      To shine for Him each day;
      In every way try to please Him,
      At home, at school, at play.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ill_be_around.php

      [Spoken Intro]https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ill_be_there.php

      Oh when the trumpet of the Lord shall sound and time shall be no more
      And the morning breaks eternal bright and fair (bright and fair)
      When the saved of earth shall gather over on the other shore
      And the roll is called up yonder I値l be there (roll is called up yonder 
      I値l be there)https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ill_bear_it_lord_for_thee.php

      I longed to be a child of God,
      And do my Savior’s will;
      And yet the sin that most I feared,
      I knew unconquered still.
      “Dear Lord," I said, for as I knelt
      I saw Him on the tree—
      “This heavy burden on my heart,
      I’ll gladly bear for Thee."https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ill_bless_the_lord_from_day_to_day.php

        I’ll bless the Lord from day to day;
        How good are all His ways!
        Ye humble souls that use to pray,
        Come, help my lips to praise.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ill_count_my_blessings.php

        I lift my heart today in praise
        To Him Who loves me so,
        Whose mercy crowneth all my days,
        And makes my cup o’erflow.
        O have I loved Him as I should
        For all His blessings free?
        Praise God Who giveth naught but good,
        For He is good to me!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ill_follow_jesus.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ill_go_where_you_want_me_to_go.php

        It may not be on the mountain’s height, or over the stormy sea;
        It may not be at the battle’s front my Lord will have need of me;
        But if by a still, small voice He calls to paths I do not know,
        I’ll answer, dear Lord, with my hand in Yours,
        I’ll go where You want me to go.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ill_have_a_new_life.php

      On the resurrection morning
      When all the dead in Christ shall rise
      I'll have a new body
      Praise the Lord, I'll have a new life
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ill_have_a_new_life2.php

      On the resurrection morning, when all the dead in Christ shall rise
      I'll have a new body
      Praise the Lord, I'll have a new life (eternal)
      Sewed in weakness, raised in power, ready to live in Paradise
      I'll have a new body
      Praise the Lord, I'll have a new life, oh yeshttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ill_live_for_him.php

          My life, my love I give to Thee,
          Thou Lamb of God Who died for me;
          O may I ever faithful be,
          My Savior and my God!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ill_live_in_glory.php

      I'd like to stay here longer then mans allowed in days
      And watch the fleeting changes of life's eneven ways
      And if my Savior calls me to that sweet home on high
      I'll live with Him forever in glory by and by
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ill_live_in_glory2.php

      I'd like to stay here longer then man's alotted days
      And watch the fleeting changes of life's uneven ways
      But if my Savior calls me to that sweet home on high
      I'll live with Him forever in glory by and byhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ill_live_on.php

        探is a sweet and glorious tho稚 that comes to me,
        I値l live on, yes, I値l live on;
        Jesus saved my soul from death, and now I知 free,
        I値l live on, yes, I値l live on.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ill_never_forget.php

      Chorus 1:
      Oh, Jesus (Jesus I'll never forget)
      What you've done for me (what you've done for me)
      Jesus I'll never forget (Jesus I'll never forget)
      You set my soul so free (set my soul so free)
      Jesus I'll never forget (Jesus I'll never forget)
      How you brought me out (how you brought me out)
      Well a no, no, no, no, no, no
      I'll never forgethttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ill_not_be_afraid.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ill_not_give_up_the_bible.php

            I’ll not give up the Bible,
            That precious book divine,
            For glory gilds its pages,
            And truth adorns each line.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ill_overcome_some_day.php

        This world is one great battlefield
        With forces all arrayed,
        If in my heart I do not yield
        I値l overcome some day.
        I値l overcome some day,
        I値l overcome some day,
        If in my heart I do not yield,
        I値l overcome some day.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ill_praise_my_maker.php

        I’ll praise my Maker while I’ve breath,
        And when my voice is lost in death,
        Praise shall employ my nobler powers;
        My days of praise shall ne’er be past,
        While life, and thought, and being last,
        Or immortality endures.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ill_say_the_great_word.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ill_see_the_new_jerusalem.php

          I’ll see the new Jerusalem when Christ to earth does come.
          I’ll see Him then, will hear His voice, all Christians will rejoice.
          Of sun and moon there is no sign, God’s light o’er all will shine.
          And then, when He has come with might, it never will be night.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ill_speak_the_honors_of_my_king.php

        I’ll speak the honors of my King,
        His form divinely fair;
        None of His sons of mortal race
        May with the Lord compare.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ill_stand_by_until_the_morning.php

        Fierce and wild the storm is raging
        Round a helpless bark,
        On to doom ’tis swiftly driving,
        O’er the waters dark!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ill_tell_the_world_that_im_a_christian.php
I’ll tell the world, that I’m a christianhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ill_try_to_bring_one.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_a_pilgrim.php

            I’m a pilgrim and a stranger,
            Rough and thorny is the road,
            Often in the midst of danger,
            But it leads to God.
            Clouds of darkness oft distress me;
            Great and many are my foes;
            Anxious cares and thoughts oppress me;
            But my Father knows.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_a_pilgrim.php

            I’m a pilgrim and a stranger,
            Rough and thorny is the road,
            Often in the midst of danger,
            But it leads to God.
            Clouds of darkness oft distress me;
            Great and many are my foes;
            Anxious cares and thoughts oppress me;
            But my Father knows.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_at_your_mercy.php

      As I stood inside the courtroom
      The judge came walking in
      There was One who stood beside me
      A compassionate friend
      As he spoke my situation
      I knew that he was in control
      Of the destiny of my eternal soulhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_bound_for_the_land_of_canan.php

      I have started for a city on that bright eternal shore
      Where the saints of God shall gather and live on forevermore
      Tis a land of love and purity where my possessions lie
      And I am bound for the land of Canaan when I die (when I die)https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_but_a_stranger_here.php

        I知 but a stranger here, Heav地 is my home;
        Earth is a desert drear, Heav地 is my home.
        Danger and sorrow stand round me on every hand;
        Heav地 is my fatherland, Heav地 is my home.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_free.php

      I'm free (I'm free), I'm free (I'm free)
      I'm free in Jesus' name
      I'm free (I'm free), I'm free (I'm free)
      To live and to proclaim
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_free_again.php

      Satan led my soul astray (Satan led my soul astray I drifted)
      From the straight and narrow way (that leads to happiness and life 
      eternal)
      But to Jesus I did pray (to the Lord I humbly prayed)
      He heard my prayer, rescued me that very day (that very day)https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_glad_im_one_of_them.php

          There are people almost everywhere
          Whose hearts are all aflame
          With the fire that fell at Pentecost,
          Which made them all acclaim;
          It is burning now within my heart—
          All glory to His Name!—
          And I’m glad that I can say I’m one of them.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_going_home.php

          My heav地ly home is bright and fair,
          Nor pain nor death can enter there;
          Its glitt池ing towers the sun outshine,
          That heav地ly mansion shall be mine.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_going_on.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_going_there.php

          There is a land of wondrous beauty,
          Where the “Living Waters" flow,
          The Word of God to all has said it,
          And it surely must be so.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_going_through.php

            Lord, I have started to walk in the light
            That shines on my pathway so clearly, so bright;
            I’ve bade the world and its follies adieu,
            And now with my Savior I mean to go through.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_gonna_sing_about_jesus.php

      Chorus:
      I'm gonna sing about Jesus (I will sing about Jesus)
      Yes, I'm gonna sing it for you (I'm gonna sing it for you)
      I'm gonna sing about Jesus (I will sing about Jesus)
      I'm gonna tell you the message so true (tell the message so true)
      So won't you sit right there while I tell you the Word
      Yes I'll tell you the best thing that you ever heard
      So let me sing about Jesus (sure want to sing)
      'Cause I sure want to sing it for you
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_happy_in_jesus_today.php

            I have a Friend Whose life is sweet to me,
            I知 happy in Jesus today;
            His blood doth keep me clean and make me free,
            I知 happy in Jesus today.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_happy_redeemed_free.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_healed.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_here_to_tell_you.php

      Chorus:
      I'm here to lift my voice and to praise His holy name
      You're here to lift your hands and to shout (shout), "Thank you, Lord!"
      We're here to lift our hearts and rejoice in God's saving grace
      He's here to fill our souls and receive our humble praise
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_in_his_love.php

      Hallelujah, I'm in His love
      Hallelujah, I'm in His love (Hallelujah)
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_just_a_stranger_here.php

      Dear Lord of Calvary, again I come to Thee
      And seek Thy precious hand to guide
      The way I'll never find without Thy love divine
      And in Thy shelter I would hide
      So Lord, I daily pray to lead me all the way
      And let Thy presence linger ever near
      I'm in a foreign land, nobody understands
      O Lord, I'm just a stranger here (just a stranger here)https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_marching_on.php

            I’m marching on to the Holy Land
            I’m marching on to the Holy Land
            I’m marching on to the Holy Land
            Praise the Lord,
            I’m marching on to the Holy Land

            Abraham is there, I’ll be there too 
            Abraham is there, I’ll be there too
            Abraham is there, I’ll be there too
            Praise the Lord
            I’m marching on to the Holy Land

            (Moses ... Elijah ...)

            If you don’t go, don’t stop me
            If you don’t go, don’t stop me
            If you don’t go, don’t stop me
            Praise the Lord
            I’m marching on to the Holy Landhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_not_ashamed_to_own_my_lord.php

            I’m not ashamed to own my Lord,
            Or to defend His cause;
            Maintain the honor of His Word,
            The glory of His cross.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_not_gonna_worry.php

      I'm not gonna worry
      I'm not gonna fret
      I'm not gonna speculate or contemplate what hasn't happened yet
      I'm not gonna worry
      He's got the whole thing in his hands
      I won't let it haunt me; I won't let it win
      I'm not gonna ruminate or meditate on how it might have been
      I'm gonna release it
      He's got the whole thing in his hands
      I'm not gonna worry
      I'm not gonna fret
      I'm just gonna wait and see, and in between give thanks for what I get
      I'll live in the moment
      He's got the whole thing in his handshttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_on_the_winning_side.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_pressing_on_the_upward_way.php

            I’m pressing on the upward way,
            New heights I’m gaining every day;
            Still praying as I’m onward bound,
            “Lord, plant my feet on higher ground."https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_redeemed.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_rejoicing_night_and_day.php
I'm rejoicing night and day
                As I walk the pilgrim way
                For the hand of God in all my life I see
                And the reason of my bliss
                Yes the secret all is this
                That the comforter abides in me.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_rejoicing_night_and_day.php
I'm rejoicing night and day
                As I walk the pilgrim way
                For the hand of God in all my life I see
                And the reason of my bliss
                Yes the secret all is this
                That the comforter abides in me.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_saved.php

      Well I'm saved (I'm saved) and I know that I am
      I'm saved (I'm saved) and I know that I am
      I'm saved (I'm saved) and I know that I am
      I'm so glad I know that I amhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_sitting_with_jesus.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_standing%20on%20the%20solid%20rock.php

      Intro:
      Through my disappointments
      Strife and discontentment
      I cast my every care upon the Lord
      No matter what obsession
      Pain or deep depression
      I'm standing on the solid rockhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_telling_the_world_about_his_love.php

      In sin I wandered, talents I squandered
      I did not heed (my brother) Him whom I need (I needed)
      Then Jesus found me from sin and bound me
      Now I'm telling the world about His love (His wondrous love)https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_traveling_the_glory_highway.php

      I知 going up the highway
      That leads to mansions grand
      (I know) I致e started for that kingdom
      Beyond these desert sands
      No more I値l stay in Egypt
      I知 bound for Beulah land
      (Oh yes) I知 traveling the glory highwayhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/im_waiting_for_thee_lord.php

        I’m waiting for Thee, Lord,
        Thy beauty to see, Lord;
        I’m waiting for Thee—
        For Thy coming again.
        Thou’rt gone over there, Lord,
        A place to prepare, Lord,
        Thy home I shall share
        At Thy coming again.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/an_image_of_that_heavenly_light.php

            An image of that heavenly light,
            The goal the Church keeps ay in sight,
            Christ on the holy mount displays
            Where He outshines the sun’s bright rays.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/immanuel_we_sing_thy_praise.php

            Immanuel, we sing Thy praise;
            Thou Prince of Life, Thou Fount of Grace,
            With all Thy saints, Thee, Lord, we sing;
            Praise, honor, thanks, to Thee we bring.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/immortal_honors_rest_on_jesus_head.php

            Immortal honors rest on Jesus’ head;
            My God, my portion, and my Living Bread;
            In Him I live, upon Him cast my care;
            He saves from death, destruction, and despair.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/immortal_love_forever_full.php

              Immortal love, forever full,
              Forever flowing free,
              Forever shared, forever whole,
              A never ebbing sea!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/immortal_invisible_god_only_wise.php

            Immortal, invisible, God only wise,
            In light inaccessible hid from our eyes,
            Most blessèd, most glorious, the Ancient of Days,
            Almighty, victorious, Thy great Name we praise.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/impatient_heart_be_still.php

                Impatient heart, be still!
                What though He tarries long?
                What though the triumph song
                Is still (is still) delayed?
                Thou hast His promise sure,
                And that is all secure;
                Be not afraid! Be not afraid!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_a_lonely_churchyard.php

                In a lonely churchyard, many miles away,
                Lies your dear old mother, ’neath the cold, cold clay;
                Mem’ries oft returning of her tears and sighs,
                If you love your mother, meet her in the skies.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_a_manger_laid_so_lowly.php

                  In a manger laid so lowly,
                  Came the Prince of Peace to earth;
                  While a choir of angels holy
                  Sang to celebrate His birth.
                  “Glory in the highest,"
                  Sang the glad angelic strain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_all_my_lords_appointed_ways.php

            In all my Lord's appointed ways,
            My journey I'll pursue;
            Hinder me not, ye much loved saints,
            For I must go with you.

            Through floods and flames, if Jesus lead,
            I'll follow where he goes;
            Hinder me not, shall be my cry,
            Though earth and hell oppose.

            Through duty, and through trials, too.
            I'll go at his command,
            Hinder me not, for I am bound
            To my Emmanuel's land.

            And when my Saviour calls me home,
            Still this my cry shall be;
            Hinder me not; come, welcome death,
            I'll gladly go with thee.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_all_my_vast_concerns_with_thee.php

            In all my vast concerns with thee,
            In vain my soul would try
            To shun thy presence, Lord, or flee
            The notice of thine eye.

            Thy all-surrounding sight surveys
            My rising and my rest,
            My public walks, my private ways,
            The secrets of my breast.

            My thoughts lie open to thee, Lord,
            Before they're formed within;
            And, ere my lips pronounce the word,
            Thou know'st the sense I mean.

            O wondrous knowledge, deep and high;
            Where can a creature hide?
            Within thy circling arms I lie,
            Beset on every side.

            So let thy grace surround me still,
            And like a bulwark prove,
            To guard my soul from every ill,
            Secured by sovereign love.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_anger_lord_rebuke_me_not.php

                  In anger, Lord, rebuke me not;
                  Withdraw the dreadful storm;
                  Nor let Thy fury grow so hot
                  Against a feeble worm.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_bethany.php

                    ’Twas good to sit at Jesus’ feet
                    In Bethany, dear Bethany!
                    And feel His tender love so sweet,
                    In Bethany, dear Bethany!
                    https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_bethlehem_a_child_was_born.php

                    In Bethlehem a Child was born,
                    Blessèd be His Name, blessèd be His Name,
                    For us His life from earth was torn,https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_boundless_mercy.php

                      In boundless mercy, gracious Lord, appear,
                      Darkness dispel, the humble mourner cheer;
                      Vain thoughts remove, melt down the flinty heart,
                      Draw every soul to choose the better part.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_christ_there_is_no_east_or_west.php

                      In Christ there is no East or West,
                      In Him no South or North;
                      But one great fellowship of love
                      Throughout the whole wide earth.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_days_of_old_on_sinai.php

                      In days of old on Sinai
                      The Lord Almighty came
                      In majesty of terror,
                      In thunder cloud and flame:
                      On Tabor, with the glory
                      Of sunniest light for vest,
                      The excellence of beauty
                      In Jesus was expressed.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_doubt_and_temptation.php

                      In doubt and temptation I rest, Lord, in Thee;
                      My hand is in Thy hand, Thou carest for me;
                      My soul with Thy counsel through life Thou wilt guide,
                      And afterward make me in glory abide.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_evil_long_i_took_delight.php

                      In evil long I took delight,
                      Unawed by shame or fear,
                      Till a new object struck my sight,
                      And stopped my wild career.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_full_and_glad_surrender.php
In full and glad surrender
            I give myself to thee,
            thine utterly and only
            and evermore to be.

            O Son of God, who lovest me,
            I will be thine alone;
            and all I have and am, Lord,
            shall henceforth be thine own!

            Reign over me, Lord Jesus;
            O make my heart thy throne:
            it shall be thine, dear Savior,
            it shall be thine alone.

            O come and reign, Lord Jesus;
            rule over everything!
            And keep me always loyal,
            and true to thee, my King.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_full_assurance_of_thy_grace.php

                      In full assurance of Thy grace
                      To Thee my prayers ascend
                      In Thine abounding love and truth,
                      O God, salvation send.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_gethsemane_alone.php

                      Oh, what wondrous love I see,
                      Freely shown for you and me,
                      By the One Who did atone!
                      Just to show His matchless grace,
                      Jesus suffered for the race,
                      In Gethsemane, alone.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_god_we_trust.php

      My soul finds rest in God alone
      Salvation comes from Him
      My hope is found in God alone
      And we will trust in Him
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_gods_word_it_is_recorded.php

                      In God’s Word it is recorded
                      That this world will not endure;
                      Then while time is yet afforded
                      Make your hope of Heaven sure;
                      For the stars, before the morning,
                      From their orbits may be hurled,
                      And the moon may send a warning
                      That tonight will end the world.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_grace_the_holy_god.php

                      In grace the holy God
                      Did full salvation plan,
                      Electing in His sovereign grace
                      To save rebellious man.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_grace_and_fear.php

                      In grief and fear, to Thee, O Lord,
                      We now for succor fly,
                      Thine awful judgments are abroad,
                      O shield us, lest we die!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_heaven_all_is_gladness.php

                        In Heaven all is gladness—
                        Here troubles press, and fears;
                        Here often bowed and sighing,
                        I eat “the bread of tears."
                        Here joy and sorrow mingle
                        For Christ’s belovèd bride;
                        But ’tis not so up yonder,
                        For there doth joy abide.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_heaven_the_wont_be_no_blues.php

      There's some people here below (here below)
      You know all they do is moan (they moan)
      They're practicing for something I don't know (I don't know)
      I'm just going to praise His name (praise His name)
      'Til I get it right someday (right someday)
      Then I'll be ready when He takes me home (takes me home)https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_heavenly_love_abiding.php

                        In heavenly love abiding, no change my heart shall fear.
                        And safe in such confiding, for nothing changes here.
                        The storm may roar without me, my heart may low be laid,
                        But God is round about me, and can I be dismayed?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_heavens_eyes.php
A fervent prayer rose up to heaven,
        A fragile soul was losing ground,
        Sorting through the earthly babble,
        Heaven heard the sound.
        This was a life of no distinction
        No successes only trials.
        Yet gazing down on this unlovely one,
        There was love in heaven's eyes.
         
        In heaven's eyes there are no losers,
        In heaven's eyes no hopeless cause.
        Only people like you
        With feelings like me,
        Amazed by the grace
        We can find in heaven's eyes.

        The orphan child, the wayward father,
        The homeless traveler in the rain.
        When life goes by and no one bothers,
        Heaven feels the pain.
        Looking down God sees each heartache,
        Knows each sorrow, hears each cry.
        And looking up we'll see compassion's fire,
        Ablaze in heaven's eyes.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_heavn_above.php

                      In Heav’n above, in Heav’n above,
                      Where God our Father dwells,
                      How boundless there the blessèdness!
                      No tongue its greatness tells;
                      There face to face, and full and free,
                      Ever and evermore we see—
                      We see the Lord of hosts!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_his_own_raiment_clad.php
In his own raiment clad,
            with his blood dyed;
            women walk sorrowing
            by his side.
            Follow to Calvary;
            tread where he trod,
            he who for ever was
            Son of God.

            On the cross lifted up,
            thy face we scan,
            bearing that cross for us,
            Son of Man.
            Thorns form thy diadem,
            rough wood thy throne;
            for us thy Blood is shed,
            us alone.

            We see thy title, Lord,
            inscribed above:
            "Jesus of Nazareth,"
            King of love.
            O, I will follow thee,
            star of my soul,
            through the deep shades of life
            to the goal.

            Yea, let thy cross be borne
            each day by me;
            mind not how heavy, if
            but with thee.
            Grant through each day of life
            to stand by thee;
            with thee, when morning breaks
            ever to be.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_his_steps.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_his_strength.php

      Chorus:
      In His strength we are overcomers
      In His strength we are never alone
      He will guide us through the night
      As we walk in His light
      In His strength we are going home
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_his_temple_god_be_praised.php

                  Hallelujah! Hallelujah!
                  In His temple God be praised;
                  In the high and heavenly places
                  Be the sounding anthem raised.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_his_temple_now_behold_him.php

                  In His temple now behold Him,
                  See the long expected Lord;
                  Ancient prophets had foretold Him—
                  God has now fulfilled His word.
                  Now to praise Him, His redeemèd
                  Shall break forth with one accord.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_his_time.php
In His time, in His time.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_homes_where_pride_and_splendor.php

                    In homes where pride and splendor
                    Their silken banners flare,
                    In homes where childhood tender
                    Is crushed by every care,
                    Is heard the cry of anguish
                    From many a helpless slave,
                    Where Satan’s captives languish,
                    And only Christ can save.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_jesus.php

                      I’ve tried in vain a thousand ways
                      My fears to quell, my hopes to raise;
                      But what I need, the Bible says,
                      Is ever, only Jesus.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_jesus_name.php

      Chorus:
      Pray for the sick and anoint them with oil in Jesus' name
      The prayer of faith will make them well in Jesus' name
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_jordans_tide_the_baptist_stands.php

            1. In Jordan's Tide the Baptist Stands
            Immersing the repenting Jews;
            The Son of God the rite demands,
            Nor dare the holy man refuse;
            Jesus descends beneath the wave,
            The emblem of his future grave.

            2. Wonder, ye heav'ns! Your Maker lies
            In deeps concealed from human view;
            Ye saints, behold him sink and rise,
            A fit example thus for you;
            The sacred record, while you read,
            Calls you to imitate the deed.

            3. But lo! From yonder op'ning skies,
            What beams of dazzling glory spread!
            Dove-like, th'eternal Spirit flies,
            And lights on the Redeemer's head;
            Amazed they see the pow'r divine,
            Around the Savior's temples shine.

            4. But hark, my soul, hark and adore!
            What sounds are those which roll along?
            Not like loud Sinai's awful roar,
            But soft and sweet as Gabriel's song;
            "This is my well-beloved Son,
            I see well pleased what he hath done."

            5. Thus as th'eternal Father spoke,
            Who shakes creation with a nod;
            Through parting skies the accents broke,
            And bids us hear the Son of God;
            O hear the awful word to-day,
            Hear all ye nations and obey!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_lifes_earnest_morning.php

                      In life’s earnest morning, when our hope was high,
                      Came Thy voice to summons, not to be put by;
                      Nor in toil nor sorrow, weakness or dismay,
                      Need we ever falter—art not Thou our stay?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_loud_exalted_strains.php

            1. In loud, exalted strains
            The King of Glory praise.
            O'er heaven and earth He reigns
            Through everlasting days;
            But, Zion, thou so richly blest,
            Art His delight, His chosen rest.
            https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_love_he_redeemed_me.php

                      In love He redeemed me, the Savior divine,
                      I’m trusting in Him, life eternal is mine;
                      Unworthy the least of His gifts to receive—
                      Salvation is mine as on Him I believe.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_lovingkindness_jesus_came.php

                      In lovingkindness Jesus came
                      My soul in mercy to reclaim,
                      And from the depths of sin and shame
                      Through grace He lifted me.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_one_true_god_we_all_believe.php

                      In one true God we all believe,
                      And to His Name all glory give,
                      Creator of all things is He
                      In the Heav’n, the earth, the sea.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_our_day_of_thanksgiving.php

                      In our day of thanksgiving one psalm let us offer
                      For the saints who before us have found their reward;
                      When the shadow of death fell upon them, we sorrowed,
                      But now we rejoice that they rest in the Lord.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_our_work_and_in_our_play.php

                      In our work and in our play,
                      Jesus, ever with us stay;
                      May we always strive to be
                      True and faithful unto Thee.
                      Then we truthfully can sing,
                      We are children of the King.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_our_work_and_in_our_play2.php
In our work and in our play,
            Jesus, be thou ever near,
            Guarding, guiding, all the day,
            Keeping in thy holy fear.

            Thou didst toil, O royal Child,
            In the far-off Holy Land,
            Blessing labour undefiled,
            Pure and honest, of the hand.

            Thou wilt bless our play-hour too,
            If we ask thy succour strong;
            Watch o'er all we say and do,
            Hold us back from guilt and wrong.

            O, how happy thus to spend
            Work and play-time in his sight,
            Till the rest which shall not end,
            Till the day which knows not night!
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_paradise_reposing.php
In Paradise reposing,
            by life's eternal well,
            the tender lambs of Jesus
            in greenest pastures dwell.

            There palms and tiny crownlets
            aglow with brightest gem,
            bedeck the baby martyrs
            who died in Bethlehem.

            With them the rose-wreathed army
            of children undefiled,
            who passed through mortal torments
            for love of Christ the Child;

            with them in peace unending,
            with them in joyous mirth,
            are all the stainless infants
            which since have gone from earth.

            The angels, once their guardians,
            their fellows now in grace,
            with them in love adoring,
            see God the Father's face.

            The lullaby to hush them
            in that eternal rest,
            is sweet angelic singing,
            their nurse God's Mother blest.

            O Jesus, loving Shepherd,
            who tenderly dost bear
            thy lambs in thine own bosom,
            bring us to join them there.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_peace_and_joy_i_now_depart.php

                      In peace and joy I now depart
                      At God’s disposing;
                      For full of comfort is my heart,
                      Soft reposing.
                      So the Lord hath promised me,
                      And death is but a slumber.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_praise_of_god_meet_duty_and_delight.php
In praise of God meet duty and delight,
            angels and creatures, flesh and spirits blest:
            in praise is earth transfigured by the sound
            and sight of heaven's everlasting feast.

            The desert is refreshed by songs of praise,
            relaxed the frown of pride, the stress of grief;
            in praise forgotten all our human spite;
            in praise the burdened heart finds sure relief.

            In praise our art and craft together meet,
            inspired, obedient, patient, practical;
            in praise join instrument and voice and sound
            to make one music for the Lord of all.

            No skill of ours, no music made on earth,
            no mortal song could scale the height of heaven;
            yet stands that cross, through grace ineffable
            the instrument of praise to sinners given.

            So, confident and festive, let us sing
            of wisdom, power and mercy there made known;
            the song of Moses and the Lamb be ours,
            through Christ raised up to life in God alone.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_remembrance.php

          In remembrance of Me eat this bread
          In remembrance of Me drink this wine
          In remembrance of Me pray for the time
          When God’s own will is donehttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_righteous_glory_reigning.php

                      In righteous glory reigning, our God sits high enthroned,
                      His right and truth maintaining, His justice making known.
                      He stands above Time’s river, the worlds within His view,
                      His right hand will deliver to every man his due.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_royal_robes_of_splendor.php

                      In royal robes of splendor,
                      Before the great King’s feet,
                      The princes of His kingdom,
                      The crowned Apostles, meet;
                      To Him their songs adoring
                      With heart and tongue they bring,
                      Pure hearts and mighty voices—
                      E’en as the angels sing.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_seasons_of_grief.php

            1. In Seasons of Grief to My God, I'll Repair
            When my heart is o'er-whelmed with sorrow and care;
            From the ends of the earth unto thee will I cry,
            "Lead me to the Rock that is higher than I."

            2. When Satan, my foe, shall come in like a flood,
            To drive my poor soul from the fountain of good,
            I'll pray to the Savior who kindly did die,
            "Lead me to the Rock that is higher than I!"

            3. And when I have ended my pilgrimage here,
            In Jesus' pure righteousness let me appear;
            From the swellings of Jordan to thee will I cry,
            "Lead me to the Rock that is higher than I!"https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_shady_green_pastures.php

                      In shady, green pastures, so rich and so sweet,
                      God leads His dear children along;
                      Where the water’s cool flow bathes the weary one’s feet,
                      God leads His dear children along.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/i_sin_i_once_had_wandered.php

                        In sin I once had wandered,
                        All weary, sad, and lone,
                        Till Jesus through His mercy
                        Adopted me His own.
                        E’er since I learned to trust Him,
                        His grace doth make me free,
                        And now I feel His pardon,
                        He’s everything to me.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_stature_grows_the_heavenly_child.php

                        In stature grows the heavenly Child,
                        With death before His eyes;
                        A Lamb unblemished, meek and mild,
                        Prepared for sacrifice.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_sweet_communion.php

                        In sweet communion, Lord, with Thee
                        I constantly abide;
                        My hand Thou holdest in Thy own
                        To keep me near Thy side.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_tenderness_he_sought_me.php

                        In tenderness He sought me,
                        Weary and sick with sin;
                        And on His shoulders brought me
                        Back to His fold again.
                        While angels in His presence sang
                        Until the courts of Heaven rang.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/int_that_great_morning.php

      There's a great day comin', a great day comin'
      There's a great day comin' by and by
      When the saints and the sinners shall be parted right and left
      Are you ready for that day to come?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_bible_we_are_told.php

              In the Bible we are told
              Of a prophet who was called
              To a city that was steeped in awful sin;
              All the people in that place
              Were devoid of saving grace,
              And the prophet seemed afraid to enter in.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_bleak_midwinter.php

              In the bleak midwinter, frosty wind made moan,
              Earth stood hard as iron, water like a stone;
              Snow had fallen, snow on snow, snow on snow,
              In the bleak midwinter, long ago.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_blood_from_the_cross.php

                In the blood from the cross,
                I have been washed from sin;
                But to be free from dross,
                Still I would enter in.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_bonds_of_death_he_lay.php

                  In the bonds of death He lay,
                  Who for our offense was slain,
                  But the Lord is risen today,
                  Christ hath brought us life again;
                  Wherefore let us all rejoice,
                  Singing loud with cheerful voice.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_book_which_thou_art_keeping.php

                  In the book which Thou art keeping,
                  In Thy Book of Life so fair,
                  Tell me, O my Savior, tell me,
                  Is my name recorded there?
                  Is it there? Is it there?
                  In Thy Book of Life so fair?
                  Tell me, O my Savior, tell me
                  Is my name recorded there?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_bulb_there_is_a_flower.php

              In the bulb there is a flower; in the seed, an apple tree;
              In cocoons, a hidden promise: butterflies will soon be free!
              In the cold and snow of winter there’s a spring that waits to be,
              Unrevealed until its season, something God alone can see.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_christians_home_in_glory.php

                In the Christian’s home in glory
                There remains a land of rest;
                There my Savior’s gone before me,
                To fulfill my soul’s request.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_city_where_the_lamb_is_the_light.php

                  There’s a country far beyond the starry sky,
                  There’s a city where there never comes a night;
                  If we’re faithful we shall go there by and by,
                  ’Tis the city where the Lamb is the light.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_cool.php

      In the cool of evening, my Lord comes down and walks with me, with me
      In the darkest of valleys, He’s there to talk, to talk to me

      On the mountains, in the valleys, in the darkest of the night
      In my sorrows, in my trials, He whispers it’s all right

      In the cool of evening, in the garden of my heart

      Oh Christian, why be discouraged when God is on His throne
      Oh sinner, why don’t you hasten, can’t you hear Him calling you home?

      In the cool of evening, He will walk and talk to you, to youhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_cross.php

      Jesus, I want to be near the cross
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_cross_of_christ_i_glory.php

                  In the cross of Christ I glory,
                  Towering o’er the wrecks of time;
                  All the light of sacred story
                  Gathers round its head sublime.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_desert_of_sorrow_and_sin.php

        written by Henry R. Trickett

        In the desert of sorrow and sin,
        Lo! I faint as I journey along;
        With the warfare without and within,
        See my strength and my hope nearly gone.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_early_morning.php

                    In the early morning, early,
                    Ere the dawn was even nigh,
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_field_with_their_flocks_abiding.php

                      In the field with their flocks abiding,
                      They lay on the dewy ground;
                      And glimmering under the starlight,
                      The sheep lay white around;
                      When the light of the Lord streamed o’er them,
                      And lo! from heaven above,
                      An angel leaned from the glory,
                      And sang his song of love.
                      He sang, that first sweet Christmas,
                      The song that shall never cease.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_fight_say_does_your_heart_grow_weary.php

                        In the fight, say, does your heart grow weary?
                        Do you find your path is rough and thorny?
                        And above the sky is dark and stormy?
                        Never mind, go on!
                        Lay aside all fear, and onward pressing,
                        Bravely fight, and God will give His blessing;
                        Though the war at times may prove distressing,
                        Never mind, go on!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_furnace_of_thy_love.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_garden.php

      I come to the garden alone
      While the dew is still on the roses
      And the voice I hear falling on my ear
      The Son of God discloses.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_glory_of_the_father.php

                            In the glory of the Father
                            When our Lord shall come again,
                            By His angel guards attended,
                            In His majesty to reign,https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_glow_of_early_morning.php

            In the glow of early morning,
            In the solemn hush of night;
            Down from Heaven’s open portals,
            Steals a messenger of light,
            Whispering sweetly to my spirit,
            While the hosts of Heaven sing:
            This the wondrous thrilling story:
            Christ is coming—Christ my King.
            This the wondrous thrilling story—
            Christ is coming—Christ my King.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_great_triumphant_morning.php

              In the great triumphant morning,
              When we hear the Bridegroom cry,
              And the dead in Christ shall rise,
              We’ll be changed to life immortal,
              In the twinkling of an eye,
              And meet Jesus in the skies.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_hall_of_the_mountain_king.php

      Goin' home (goin' home, goin' home)
      Goin' home (goin' home, goin' home)
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_harvest_field_now_ripened.php

              In the harvest field now ripened
              There’s a work for all to do;
              Hark! the voice of God is calling
              To the harvest calling you.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_harvest_field_there_is_work_to_do.php

              In the harvest field there is work to do,
              For the grain is ripe, and the reapers few;
              And the Master’s voice bids the workers true
              Heed the call that He gives today.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_heart_of_jesus.php

        In the heart of Jesus, there is love for you,
        Love most pure and tender, love most deep and true;
        Why should you be lonely, why for friendship sigh,
        When the heart of Jesus has a full supply?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_heavens_the_lord_almighty.php

                In the heav’ns the Lord Almighty
                Fixed His everlasting throne;
                Over all his His dominion,
                He is God and He alone.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_hollow_of_his_hand.php

                  In the hollow of His hand He will hide me
                  When doubt and sin draw near,
                  Though no earthly friend may walk beside me,
                  I rest secure from fear.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_holy_keeping.php

                        Savior, in Thy holy keeping,
                        Take, O take our hearts anew;
                        Guard us from the world’s temptation,
                        All the pilgrim journey thro’.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_holy_land.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_hour_of_my_distress.php
In the hour of my distress,
            when temptations me oppress,
            and when I my sins confess,
            sweet Spirit, comfort me.

            When I lie within my bed,
            sick in heart, and sick in head,
            and with doubts discomforted,
            sweet Spirit, comfort me.

            When the house doth sigh and weep,
            and the world is drowned in sleep,
            yet mine eyes the watch do keep,
            sweet Spirit, comfort me.

            When, God knows, I'm tossed about,
            either with despair or doubt,
            yet, before the glass be out,
            sweet Spirit, comfort me.

            When the judgment is revealed,
            and that opened which was sealed,
            when to thee I have appealed,
            sweet Spirit, comfort me.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_hour_of_trial.php

                    In the hour of trial, Jesus, plead for me,
                    Lest by base denial I depart from Thee.
                    When Thou seest me waver, with a look recall,
                    Nor for fear or favor suffer me to fall.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_house_of_many_mansions.php

                      In the house of many mansions,
                      With its portals bright and fair,
                      I am laying up my treasures,
                      And my heart will soon be there.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_land_of_fadeless_day.php

                In the land of fadeless day,
                Lies “the city foursquare,"
                It shall never pass away,
                And there is “no night there."https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_light_of_god.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_lords_atoning_grief.php

            In the Lord's atoning grief
            Be our rest and sweet relief;
            Store we deep in heart's recess
            All the shame and bitterness:

            Thorns and cross and nails and lance,
            Wounds, our rich inheritance,
            Vinegar and gall and reed,
            And the cry his soul that freed.

            May these all our spirits fill,
            And with love's devotion thrill;
            In our souls plant virtue's root,
            And mature its glorious fruit.

            Crucified, we thee adore;
            Thee with all our hearts implore,
            Us with all thy saints unite
            In the realms of heavenly light.

            Christ, by coward hands betrayed,
            Christ, for us a captive made,
            Christ, upon the bitter Tree
            Slain for man, be praise to thee.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_midst_of_earthly_life.php

                    In the midst of earthly life
                    Snares of death surround us;
                    Who shall help us in the strife
                    Lest the Foe confound us?
                    Thou only, Lord, Thou only!
                    We mourn that we have greatly erred,
                    That our sins Thy wrath have stirred.
                    Holy and righteous God!
                    Holy and mighty God!
                    Holy and all merciful Savior!
                    Eternal Lord God!
                    Save us lest we perish
                    In the bitter pangs of death.
                    Have mercy, O Lord!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_morning_i_will_raise.php

                      In the morning I will raise
                      To my God the voice of praise;
                      With His kind protection blest,
                      Sweet and deep has been my rest.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_name_of_chist_we_gather.php
In the name of Christ we gather,
            in the name of Christ we sing,
            celebrate new vows, new promise
            of a life's whole offering,
            here ordained to lead God's people
            at the Gospel's beckoning.

            Sons and daughters of the Spirit--
            these are called to teach and care,
            called as were the first disciples,
            commonwealth of Christ to share,
            by the bread and wine and water
            sacraments of grace declare.

            In the ministry of preaching
            may the word spring into life;
            in the time of doubt and challenge,
            may its truth affirm belief;
            in the day of pain and darkness,
            heal the hurt of guilt and grief.

            Now within this solemn moment
            we invoke the power of God--
            by the hands laid on in blessing
            be there strength to take the load,
            be there faithfulness in loving,
            be there courage for this road.

            Word of joy, enlivening Spirit,
            more than lover, parent, friend, 
            born in Jesus, born in Mary,
            born in us, that love extend,
            grow with your chosen servant,
            life of God that has no end.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_name_which_earth_and_heaven.php

            1. In the name which earth and heaven
            Ever worship, praise, and fear,
            Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,
            We a house have builded here.
            Here with prayer its deep foundations,
            In the faith of Christ did lay,
            Trusting by His help to crown it
            With the top-stone in its day.
            https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_quiet_consecration.php

                        In the quiet consecration
                        Of this glad communion hour,
                        Here we rest in You, Lord Jesus,
                        Taste Your love, and touch Your power.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_resurrection_morning2.php

                            In the resurrection morning,
                            When the trump of God shall sound,
                            We shall rise, Hallelujah! we shall rise!
                            Then the saints will come rejoicing
                            And no tears will e’er be found,
                            We shall rise, Hallelujah! we shall rise.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_resurrection_morning.php

                          In the resurrection morning
                          We will see the Savior coming,
                          And the sons of God a-shouting in the kingdom of the 
                          Lord.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_rifted_rock_im_resting.php

                              In the rifted Rock I’m resting;
                              Safely sheltered, I abide.
                              There no foes nor storms molest me,
                              While within the cleft I hide.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_secret_of_his_presence.php

                                In the secret of His presence how my soul 
                                delights to hide!
                                Oh, how precious are the lessons which I learn 
                                at Jesus’ side!
                                Earthly cares can never vex me, neither trials 
                                lay me low;
                                For when Satan comes to tempt me, to the secret 
                                place I go,
                                To the secret place I go.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_service_of_the_king.php

                                  I am happy in the service of the King.
                                  I am happy, O so happy!
                                  I have peace and joy that nothing else can 
                                  bring,
                                  In the service of the King.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_shadow_of_his_wings.php

              In the shadow of His wings
              There is rest, sweet rest;
              There is rest from care and labor,
              There is rest for friend and neighbor;
              In the shadow of His wings
              There is rest, sweet rest,
              In the shadow of His wings
              There is rest (sweet rest).https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_shadow_of_the_cross.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_silent_midnight.php
In the silent midnight,
            homeless and lone,
            Jacob slept aweary
            pillowed on a stone.
            Far from all who loved him
            was the wanderer then,
            faring forth to labor 
            in the world of men.

            Then what sudden glories
            flashed across his dream!
            Heavenly splendors breaking
            over hill and stream;
            down from heights of glory,
            through the wandering air,
            angels, countless angels,
            thronged the golden stair.

            In the solemn midnight
            Jacob woke from sleep,
            God was close beside him
            in the silent deep:
            through the misty morning
            soon he must depart,
            with the heavenly vision
            bright within his heart.

            We must take our journey
            to the land unknown,
            we may fail in courage,
            homeless and alone:
            angel-hosts to guard us,
            God in heaven above:
            and we dare not falter
            if we trust his love.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_silent_midnight_watches.php

                In the silent midnight watches,
                Standing at your door,
                Calls the Savior, pleading, knocking,
                Now as oft before.
                He would enter with salvation,
                Heart oppressed by sin!
                Open now the door for Jesus,
                Let Him enter in!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_sweet_by_and_by.php

                    There’s a land that is fairer than day,
                    And by faith we can see it afar;
                    For the Father waits over the way
                    To prepare us a dwelling place there.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_twilight_of_the_morning.php

              When the trump of the great archangel
              Its mighty tones shall sound,
              And, the end of the age proclaiming,
              Shall pierce the depths profound;
              When the Son of Man shall come in His glory
              To take the saints on high,
              What a shouting in the skies from the multitudes that rise,
              Changed in the twinkling of an eye.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_twilight_of_the_morning.php

              When the trump of the great archangel
              Its mighty tones shall sound,
              And, the end of the age proclaiming,
              Shall pierce the depths profound;
              When the Son of Man shall come in His glory
              To take the saints on high,
              What a shouting in the skies from the multitudes that rise,
              Changed in the twinkling of an eye.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_upper_room.php

      In the upper room (upper upper, upper upper, upper room)
      In the upper room (upper upper, upper upper, upper room)
      In the upper room (upper upper, upper upper, upper room)https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_vineyard_of_our_father.php

                In the vineyard of our Father
                Daily work we find to do;
                Scattered fruit our hands may gather,
                Though we are but weak and few;
                Little clusters
                Help to fill the basket, too.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_vineyard_of_the_lord.php

                  In the vineyard of the Lord,
                  There is work for all to do;
                  Will you go and work today,
                  With a purpose strong and true?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_warfare_that_is_raging.php

              In the warfare that is raging
              For the truth and for the right,
              When the conflict fierce is raging
              With the powers of the night,
              God needs people brave and true;
              May He then depend on you?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_thee_alone_o_christ_my_lord.php

            In Thee alone, O Christ, my Lord,
            My hope on earth remaineth;
            I know Thou wilt Thine aid afford,
            Naught else my soul sustaineth.
            No strength of man, no earthly stay,
            Can help me in the evil day;
            Thou, only Thou, canst aid supply.
            To Thee I cry;
            On Thee I bid my heart rely.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_thee_o_lord_i_put_my_trust2.php

                  In Thee, O Lord, I put my trust;
                  Shamed let me never be;
                  O save me in Thy righteousness,
                  Give ear, and rescue me.
                  Be Thou my rock, my dwelling place,
                  Forever mine, as now;
                  Salvation Thou hast willed for me,
                  My rock and fortress, Thou.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_thee_o_lord_i_put_my_trust.php

                In Thee, O Lord, I put my trust,
                I call upon Thy Name;
                O save me in Thy righteousness,
                Nor let me suffer shame.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_these_the_closing_days_of_time.php

                    In these, the closing days of time,
                    What joy the glorious hope affords,
                    That soon—O wondrous truth sublime!
                    He shall reign, King of kings and Lord of Lords.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_this_holy_place.php

      In this holy place
      As we're face to face
      With Your sweet embrace
      Surrounding me
      healing waters flow
      And they wash my soul
      All I need to know
      Is here in this holy place

      O God of grace and holiness
      quiet all my busyness
      Teach my heart to trust
      Teach me to wait
      Teach me to wait
      Teach me to wait
      In this holy placehttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_this_quiet_moment.php
Christian 
lyrics online will lead you to thousands of lyrics to hymns, choruses, worship 
songs and gospel recordings. Free Christian hymn lyrics include popular hymns, 
both new and old, traditional and modern, as well as rare and hard-to-find 
hymns. We have been online since 2004 and have reached over 1 million people in 
over 150 countries worldwide. In 2007, this site became the largest Christian 
lyrics site on the entire internet. 

© 2011
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_this_very_room.php
In this very room 
            there's quite enough love for one like me,
            And in this very room there's quite enough joy for one like me,
            And there's quite enough hope and quite enough power to chase away 
            any gloom,
            For Jesus, Lord Jesus ... is in this very room.
            https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_thy_cleft_o_rock_of_ages.php

                    In Thy cleft, O Rock of Ages, hide Thou me!
                    When the fitful tempest rages, hide Thou me!
                    Where no mortal arm can sever
                    From my heart Thy love forever,
                    Hide me, O Thou Rock of Ages, safe in Thee!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_thy_heritage_the_heaven.php

                      In Thy heritage the heathen
                      Now, O God, triumphant stand;
                      They defile Thy holy temple,
                      They destroy Thy chosen land;
                      Ruthless, they have slain Thy servants,
                      They have caused Thy saints to mourn;
                      In the sight of all about us
                      We endure reproach and scorn.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_the_holy_keeping.php

                        Savior, in Thy holy keeping,
                        Take, O take our hearts anew;
                        Guard us from the world’s temptation,
                        All the pilgrim journey thro’.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_thy_holy_place.php

                          In Thy holy place we bow,
                          Perfumes sweet to heaven rise,
                          While our golden censers glow
                          With the fire of sacrifice.
                          Saints low bending, prayers ascending,
                          Holy lips and hands implore;
                          Faith believing and receiving
                          Grace from Him Whom we adore.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_thy_name_o_lord.php

                            In Thy Name, O Lord, assembling,
                            We, Thy people, now draw near;
                            Teach us to rejoice with trembling,
                            Speak, and let Thy servants hear—
                            Hear with meekness,
                            Hear Thy Word with godly fear.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_thy_wrath_and_hot_displeasure.php

                              In Thy wrath and hot displeasure,
                              Chasten not Thy servant, Lord;
                              Let Thy mercy, without measure,
                              Help and peace to me afford.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_time_of_tribulation.php

                                In time of tribulation, hear, Lord, my feeble 
                                cries;
                                With humble supplication to Thee my spirit 
                                flies;
                                My heart with grief is breaking, scarce can my 
                                voice complain;
                                Mine eyes with tears kept waking, still watch 
                                and weep in vain.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_token_that_thou_shalt_not_fear.php

                                  In token that thou shalt not fear
                                  Christ crucified to own,
                                  We print the cross upon thee here,
                                  And stamp thee His alone.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_union_with_the_lamb.php

            In Union with the Lamb,
            From condemnation free
            The saints from everlasting were
            And shall forever be

            In cov'nant from old.
            The sons of God they were
            The feelest lamb in Jesus' fold
            Was blessed in Jesus there

            Its bonds shall never break
            Though earth's old columns bow
            The stong, the tempted, and the weak
            Are one in Jesus now.

            With joy lift up your heads
            Ye highly favored few
            When through the earth destruction spreads
            For what shall injure you?

            When storms or tempests rise,
            Or sins your peace assail,
            Your hope in Jesus never dies
            'T is cast within the vail.

            Here let the weary rest
            Who love the Savior's name;
            Though with no sweet enjoyment blest
            This cov'nant stands the same.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_vain_we_seek_for_peace.php

            In vain we seek for peace with God,
            By methods of our own;
            Jesus, there's nothing but thy blood
            Can bring us near the throne.

            The threat'nings of thy broken law
            Impress the soul with dread;
            If God the sword of justice draw,
            It strikes the spirit dead.

            But thine illustrioius sacrifice
            Hath answered these demands;
            And peace and pardon from the skies
            Came down from Jesus' hands.

            Here all the ancient types agree,
            The altar and the Lamb;
            And prophets in their vision see
            Salvation through his name.

            'Tis by thy death we live, O Lord,
            'Tis on thy cross we rest;
            Forever be thy love adored
            Thy name forever blest.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_vision_to_his_saints_god_spake.php

              In vision to His saints God spake:
              “From out the people one I take,
              A mighty leader, true and brave,
              Ordained, exalted, strong to save.
              My chosen servant I appoint,
              With holy oil his head anoint;
              My hand with him shall still remain,
              My arm his strength shall well sustain.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_your_care.php

      Sleep, Mary sleep, I will be there soon
      Entering earth through your precious womb
      My child oh my mother of earth
      Give me the gift of birthhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/in_zions_sacred_gates.php

        In Zion’s sacred gates let hymns of praise begin,
        While acts of faith and love in ceaseless beauty shine;
        In mercy there, while God is known,
        Before His throne with songs appear.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/incarnation_hymn.php

              In mute astonishment and awe,
              The angels learn God’s plan
              To send His Uncreated Son
              Down to the Earth—as Man!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/infants_tossed.php

      Chorus 1:
      Infants tossed to and fro (they're babies)
      Want their bottles, won't eat meat
      Crave that baby food, it's so sweet
      Have to be spoonfed, don't they know
      If they don't eat right, they'll never grow
      Infants tossed to and frohttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/infinite_excellence_is_thine.php

              Infinite excellence Is Thine
              Thou lovely Prince of grace!
              Thy uncreated beauties shine
              With never-fading rays.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/infinite_god_to_thee_we_raise.php

              Infinite God, to Thee we raise
              Our hearts in solemn songs of praise,
              By all Thy works on earth adored,
              We worship Thee, the common Lord;
              The everlasting Father own,
              And bow our souls before Thy throne.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/infinite_love.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/inside_the_door.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/inside_the_gate.php

      Oh how happy I will be when life's journey here is run
      And I look upon His face and I hear Him say, "Well done
      You have fought a faithful fight and my child you've kept the faith
      Enter now my joys are yours, so just step inside the gate"https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/inspiration.php

      Inspired by His love
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/inspirer_and_hearer_of_prayer.php

        Inspirer and hearer of prayer,
        Thou Shepherd and Guardian of Thine,
        My all to Thy covenant care,
        I, sleeping or waking, resign.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/instrument_of_praise.php

      I don’t know why I just start to cry sometimes and I feel so alone
      The pain is too much and I long for Your touch inside satisfying my soul
      But I know that You’re shaping me every day
      And I don’t want to be a lump of unsculpted clayhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/into_jerusalem_jesus_rode.php
Into Jerusalem Jesus rode,
            triumphant king acclaimed;
            palm branches spread to honor his way,
            garments laid down as tokens of praise;
            shouts of "Hosanna" surged through the throng
            into Jerusalem.

            Within Jerusalem Jesus stood,
            masquerade king reviled;
            thorns made a crown (grim satire of truth),
            robe like a wound thrown over his back;
            echoes of "Crucify" filled the air
            within Jerusalem.

            Outside Jerusalem Jesus hung,
            crucified King despised;
            wood formed a cross suspending his life;
            soldiers cast lots to deal out his clothes;
            his lonely cries: "My God"; 
            "It is done," outside Jerusalem.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/into_the_heart_of_jesus.php

            Into the heart of Jesus
            Deeper and deeper I go,
            Seeking to know the reason
            Why He should love me so,
            Why He should stoop to lift me
            Up from the miry clay,
            Saving my soul, making me whole,
            Though I had wandered away.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/into_the_tent_where_a_gypsy_boy_lay.php

              Into the tent where a gypsy boy lay,
              Dying alone at the close of the day,
              News of salvation we carried; said he:
              “Nobody ever has told it to me!"https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/into_the_woods.php

              Into the woods my Master went,
              Clean forspent, forspent,
              Into the woods my Master came,
              Forspent with love and shame.
              But the olives they were not blind to Him.
              The little grey leaves were kind to Him,
              The thorn tree had a mind to Him,
              When into the woods He came.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/into_thine_hand_o_god_of_truth.php

              Into Thine hand, O God of truth,
              My spirit I commit;
              Thou hast redeemed my soul from death,
              And saved me from the pit.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/invisible_hands.php

      Invisible hands (invisible hands) are waiting to guide you
      Invisible hands (invisible hands) will show you the way (will show you the 
      way)
      Have faith in the Lord (have faith in the Lord), He's always beside you
      So pray and believe, and help you'll receive from invisible handshttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/invited_lord_by_boundless_grace.php

              Invited, Lord, by boundless grace,
              I stand a guest before Thy face;
              As Host Thou spreadst no common food:
              Here is Thy body and Thy blood.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/is_born_savior.php

      Holy Messiah (He's born a Savior)
      Holy Messiah (He's born a Savior)
      Holy Messiah (He's born a Savior)
      Holy Messiah
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/is_it_for_me.php

              Is it for me, dear Savior,
              Thy glory and Thy rest,
              For me, so weak and sinful?
              O shall I be so blessed?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/is_it_not_wonderful.php

            Wondrous it seemeth to me
            Jesus so gracious should be,
            Mercy revealing, comforting, healing,
            Blessing a sinner like me.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/is_it_the_crowning_day.php

              Jesus may come today
              Glad day, glad day!
              And I would see my Friend;
              Dangers and troubles would end
              If Jesus would come today.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/is_it_there.php

              Is my hope on the rifted Rock,
              Cleft by the Lord for me?
              Is my name in the book of life?
              O that my faith could see!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/is_my_name_written_there.php

              Lord, I care not for riches, neither silver nor gold;
              I would make sure of Heaven, I would enter the fold.
              In the book of Thy kingdom, with its pages so fair,
              Tell me, Jesus, my Savior, is my name written there?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/is_not_this_the_land_of_beulah.php

        I am dwelling on the mountain,
        Where the golden sunlight gleams
        O’er a land whose wondrous beauty
        Far exceeds my fondest dreams,
        Where the air is pure, ethereal,
        Laden with the breath of flowers,
        They are blooming by the fountain,
        ’Neath the amaranthine bow’rs.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/is_that_the_old_ship_of_zion.php

      I was standing on the banks of the river
      Looking out over life's troubled sea
      When I saw that old ship that was sailing
      Is that the old ship of Zion I see?
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/is_the_blood_still_fresh_for_you.php

      There's a power to heal and make new
      There was a man who lived long, long ago
      Who knew His Father's will
      To an Old Rugged Cross He knew He'd go
      His purpose to fulfillhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/is_there_a_heart_bent_oer_with_sorrow.php

              Is there a heart bent o’er with sorrow?
              Is there a life weighed down by care?
              Come to the cross, each burden bearing;
              All your anxiety—leave it there.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/is_there_a_heart_that_is_waiting.php

              Is there a heart that is waiting,
              Longing for pardon today?
              Hear the glad message proclaiming,
              Jesus is passing this way.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/is_there_any_room_for_jesus.php

              Is there any room for Jesus?
              He Who died on Calvary,
              He Who standeth, knocking, waiting,
              Pleading with you tenderly.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/is_there_something_i_can_do.php

              Savior, may a little child
              In its weakness, come to Thee?
              Thou wert ever meek and mild;
              Can my heart as gentle be?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/is_this_the_kind_return.php

        Is this the kind return,
        And these the thanks we owe,
        Thus to abuse eternal love,
        Whence all our blessings flow?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/is_thy_cruse_of_comfort_wasting.php

              Is thy cruse of comfort wasting?
              Rise, and with thy brother share.
              And through all the years of famine
              On its bounty ye shall fare.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/is_thy_heart_right_with_god.php

              Have thy affections been nailed to the cross?
              Is thy heart right with God?
              Dost thou count all things for Jesus but loss?
              Is thy heart right with God?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/is_your_all_on_the_alter.php

              You have longed for sweet peace,
              And for faith to increase,
              And have earnestly, fervently prayed;
              But you cannot have rest,
              Or be perfectly blest,
              Until all on the altar is laid.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/is_your_hope_of_glory_bright.php

              Is your hope of glory bright?
              Are you walking in the light,
              Ever shining from the Savior’s throne?
              Have you gone to Him for rest,
              When your heart was sore oppressed?
              Are you trusting in His arm alone?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/is_your_life_a_channel_of_blessing.php

              Is your life a channel of blessing?
              Is the love of God flowing through you?
              Are you telling the lost of the Savior?
              Are you ready His service to do?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/is_your_name_enrolled_in_heaven.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/isaiah_6_3.php
Christian 
lyrics online will lead you to thousands of lyrics to hymns, choruses, worship 
songs and gospel recordings. Free Christian hymn lyrics include popular hymns, 
both new and old, traditional and modern, as well as rare and hard-to-find 
hymns. We have been online since 2004 and have reached over 1 million people in 
over 150 countries worldwide. In 2007, this site became the largest Christian 
lyrics site on the entire internet. 

© 2011
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/isaiah_mighty_seer.php

            Isaiah, mighty seer, in days of old
            The Lord of all in spirit did behold
            High on a lofty throne, in splendor bright,
            With flowing train that filled the temple quite.
            Above the throne were stately seraphim;
            Six wings had they, these messengers of Him.
            With twain they veiled their faces, as was meet,
            With twain in reverent awe they hid their feet,
            And with the other twain aloft they soared,
            One to the other called and praised the Lord:
            “Holy is God, the Lord of Sabaoth!
            Holy is God, the Lord of Sabaoth!
            Holy is God, the Lord of Sabaoth!
            Behold, His glory filleth all the earth!"
            The beams and lintels trembled at the cry,
            And clouds of smoke enwrapped the throne on high.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/isnt_the_love_of_jesus_something_wonderful.php

            There will never be a sweeter story,
            Story of the Savior's love divine,
            Love that bro't Him from the realms of glory
            Just to save a sinful soul like mine

            CHORUS:
            Isn't the love of Jesus something wonderful,
            Wonderful, wonderful,
            O,  Isn't the love of Jesus something wonderful!
            Wonderful it is to me.

            Boundless as the universe around me
            Reaching to the farthest soul away,
            Saving, keeping love it was that found me,
            That is why my heart can truly say.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_came_upon_the_midnight_clear.php

              It came upon the midnight clear,
              That glorious song of old,
              From angels bending near the earth,
              To touch their harps of gold;
              “Peace on the earth, good will to men,
              From Heaven’s all gracious King."
              The world in solemn stillness lay,
              To hear the angels sing.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_cleanseth_me.php

              There is a stream that flows from Calvary,
              A crimson tide so deep and wide.
              It washes whiter than the purest snow;
              It cleanseth me, I know.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_fell_upon_a_summer_day.php

              It fell upon a summer day,
              When Jesus walked in Galilee,
              The mothers from a village brought
              Their children to His knee.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_is_a_glorious_mystery.php

            1. It Is A Glorious Mystery -- 'Tis a Wonder
            That ever I should saved be ' Tis a wonder
            No heart can think, no tongue can tell,
            'Tis a wonder, wonder, wonder,
            The love of God unspeakable 'tis a wonder.

            2. Great mystery, that God should place
            His love on one of Adam's race,
            That I should also share a part,
            And find a mansion in His heart.

            3. Great mystery, I can't tell why
            That Christ for sinful worms should die;
            Should leave the boundless realms of bliss,
            And die for sinners on the cross.

            4. Oh! Why was I not left behind,
            Among the thousands of mankind,
            Who run the dang'rous sinful race,
            And die, and never taste His grace?

            5. 'Twas love that spread the gracious feast;
            'Twas love that made my soul a guest;
            'Twas love that brought Him from above;
            'Twas love, Oh! Matchless, boundless love.

            6. Not all the heav'nly hosts can scan
            The glories of this noble plan;
            Oh! 'Tis a glorious mystery,
            And will be to eternity.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_is_a_thing_most_wonderful.php

              It is a thing most wonderful,
              Almost too wonderful to be,
              That God’s own Son should come from Heav’n,
              And die to save a child like me.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_is_finished2.php

              Nothing, either great or small—
              Nothing, sinner, no;
              Jesus died and paid it all,
              Long, long ago.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_is_finished.php

            It is finished! Christ hath known
            All the life of men wayfaring;
            Human joys and sorrows sharing,
            Making human needs His own.
            Lord, in us Thy life renewing,
            Lead us where Thy feet have trod,
            Till, the way of truth pursuing,
            Human souls find rest in God.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_is_finished_christ_hath_known.php
It is finished! Christ hath known
            all the life of men wayfaring;
            human joys and sorrows sharing,
            making human needs his own.
            Lord, in us thy life renewing,
            lead us where thy feet have trod,
            till, the way of truth pursuing,
            human souls find rest in God.

            It is finished! Christ is slain,
            on the altar of creation,
            offering for a world's salvation
            sacrifice of love and pain.
            Lord, thy love through pain revealing,
            purge our passions, scourge our vice,
            till, upon the tree of healing,
            self is slain in sacrifice.

            It is finished! Christ our King
            wins the victor's crown of glory;
            sun and stars recite his story,
            floods and fields his triumph sing.
            Lord, whose praise the world is telling,
            Lord, to whom all power is given,
            by thy death, hell's armies quelling,
            bring thy saints to reign in heaven.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_is_finished_blessed_jesus.php

              It is finished! Blessèd Jesus,
              Thou hast breathed Thy latest sigh,
              Teaching us the sons of Adam
              How the Son of God can die.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_is_finished_man_of_sorrows.php

            “It is finished!" Man of Sorrows!
            From Thy cross our frailty borrows
            Strength to bear and conquer thus.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_is_for_us_all_today.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_is_glory_just_to_walk_with_him.php

              It is glory just to walk with Him Whose blood has ransomed me;
              It is rapture for my soul each day.
              It is joy divine to feel Him near where’er my path may be.
              Bless the Lord, it’s glory all the way!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_is_glory_to_talk_with_him.php

              When the cares of life oppress you
              And the load is hard to bear;
              When your troubles great distress you
              And there’s none who seems to care;
              Talk to Jesus, He will bless you
              And your every burden share;
              It is glory to talk with Him.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_is_good_for_us_to_be_here.php

      Chorus:
      It is good for us to be here
      Praise the Lord
      And it's good to sing His praises
      Praise the Lord
      Give your praise to God on high
      Lift your voices to the sky
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_is_good_to_sing_thy_praises.php

              It is good to sing Thy praises and to thank Thee, O Most High,
              Showing forth Thy lovingkindness when the morning lights the sky.
              It is good when night is falling of Thy faithfulness to tell,
              While with sweet, melodious praises, songs of adoration swell.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_is_he.php

      The stage was set, it was the first coming
      A baby boy, as the angel said
      To the shepherds the wise men, oh could this be?
      The Messiah our Savior, oh is this He?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_is_i.php

              The storm in all its fury
              Swept dark Gennesaret;
              They cried in vain for succor,
              Till Hope’s lone star had set;
              Then Christ came on the waters
              In answer to their cry,
              And spake in tones of comfort,
              “Fear not, for it is I.
              Fear not, for it is I."https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_is_me_lord.php

      Chorus 1:
      Is it me Lord
      Tell me am I the one
      Is it me Lord
      Losing sight of the Son
      Just as Judas betrayed
      From the Saviour I've strayed
      Is it me Lord
      Am I the one
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_is_mine.php

              God’s abiding peace is in my soul today,
              Yes, I feel it now, yes I feel it now;
              He has taken all my doubts and fears away,
              Tho’ I cannot tell you how.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_is_not_death_to_die.php

        It is not death to die,
        To leave this weary road,
        And midst the brotherhood on high
        To be at home with God.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_is_true_within_my_heart.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_is_truly_wonderful.php

              He pardoned my transgressions,
              He sanctified my soul,
              He honors my confessions,
              Since by His blood I’m whole.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_is_well_with_my_soul.php

              When peace, like a river, attendeth my way,
              When sorrows like sea billows roll;
              Whatever my lot, Thou has taught me to say,
              It is well, it is well, with my soul.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_may_be_at_morn.php

              It may be at morn, when the day is awaking,
              When sunlight through darkness and shadow is breaking
              That Jesus will come in the fullness of glory
              To receive from the world “His own."https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_may_be_in_the_valley.php

              It may be in the valley, where countless dangers hide;
              It may be in the sunshine that I, in peace, abide;
              But this one thing I know—if it be dark or fair,
              If Jesus is with me, I’ll go anywhere!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_may_not_be_on_mountains_height.php

              It may not be on the mountain’s height, or over the stormy sea;
              It may not be at the battle’s front my Lord will have need of me;
              But if by a still, small voice He calls to paths I do not know,
              I’ll answer, dear Lord, with my hand in Yours,
              I’ll go where You want me to go.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_may_not_be_our_lot.php

              It may not be our lot to wield
              The sickle in the ripened field;
              Nor ours to hear, on summer eves,
              The reaper’s song among the sheaves.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_must_be_settled_tonight.php

              “It must be settled tonight,
              Tomorrow may be too late";
              The angel of death may come,
              And seal forever my fate.
              It must be settled to-night,
              I can no longer wait,
              Peace with my God I now must have,
              Tomorrow may be too late.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_passeth_knowledge.php

              It passeth knowledge, that dear love of Thine!
              My Jesus! Savior! yet this soul of mine
              Would of that love, in all its depth and length,
              Its height and breadth, and everlasting strength
              Know more and more.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_pays_to_serve_jesus.php

              The service of Jesus true pleasure affords,
              In Him there is joy without an alloy;
              ’Tis Heaven to trust Him and rest on His words;
              It pays to serve Jesus each day.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_satisfies_my_soul.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_was_alone_the_savior_prayed.php

            It was alone the Savior prayed
            In dark Gethsemane;
            Alone He drained the bitter cup
            And suffered there for me.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_was_his_will.php

      Chorus:
      It was His will (it was His will), His Son would suffer (His Son would 
      suffer)
      It was His will (it was His will), He'd take the blame
      There simply could (could not be) not be another (no, not one)
      The lamb of God for us was slainhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_was_jesus_who_set_me_free.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_was_midnight_in_the_valley.php

            It was midnight in the valley, and the camp was dark and still,
            Where the slumb’ring host of Midian lay along the sloping hill,
            When a blinding flash of torches, and a trumpet loud and shrill,
            Threw out the battle cry:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_was_poor_little_jesus.php
It was poor little Jesus, yes, yes;
            he was born on Christmas, yes, yes;
            and laid in a manger, yes, yes;
            wasn't that a pity and a shame, Lord, Lord,
            wasn't that a pity and shame?

            It was poor little Jesus, yes, yes;
            child of Mary, yes, yes;
            didn't have a cradle, yes, yes;
            wasn't that a pity and a shame, Lord, Lord,
            wasn't that a pity and shame?

            It was poor little Jesus, yes, yes;
            they nailed him to the cross, Lord, yes, yes;
            they hung him with a robber, yes, yes;
            wasn't that a pity and a shame, Lord, Lord,
            wasn't that a pity and shame?

            It was poor little Jesus, yes, yes;
            he's risen from darkness, yes, yes;
            he's 'scended into glory, yes, yes;
            no more a pity and a shame, Lord, Lord,
            no more a pity and shame?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/it_will_matter_but_at_last.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/its_about_jesus.php

      Chorus 1:
      I don't care what my friends say
      When Christmas comes around
      I don't care what my friends say
      I really know what it's all about
      It's not the toys, It's not the sweets
      It's not Rudolph or stocking treats
      It's not the snow, It's not the lights
      Christmas Trees or "A Wonderful Life"
      I know what it's all about (about Jesus)
      I know what it's all about (about Jesus)
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/its_all_from_you.php

      Chorus 1:
      You give me life, you give me breath
      You give me everything I’ll ever have
      You give me love, you give me peace
      You give me everything I’ll ever need
      It’s all from youhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/its_all_right.php

      Chorus 1:
      I said it’s all right (It’s all right)
      It’s all right (It’s all right)
      It’s all right (It’s all right)
      It’s all right (It’s all right)
      Don’t you know that
      Just a little talk with Jesus makes it right (just a talk with Jesus)
      Do you know it’s all right (it’s all right)
      It’s all right (It’s all right)
      It’s all right (It’s all right)
      It’s all right (It’s all right)
      Don’t you know that
      Just a little talk with Jesus makes it right
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/its_gonna_rain.php

      Chorus:
      Well, It's gonna rain
      Well, it's gonna rain
      Oh, you better get ready
      And bear this in mind
      For God showed Noah the rainbow sign
      "It won't be water, but fire this time"https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/its_gonna_right.php

      I can hardly wait, you know it's gonna be here
      The show of a lifetime, I've been waitin' for years
      I'm getting front row seats, and you'd better believe that
      No price is too high
      For that glorious spectacle coming,
      Coming out of the sky!
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/its_just_like_his_great_love.php

              A friend I have called Jesus, Whose love is strong and true,
              And never fails howe’er ’tis tried, no matter what I do;
              I’ve sinned against this love of His, but when I knelt to pray,
              Confessing all my guilt to Him, the sin clouds rolled away.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/its_me_again_lord.php
Troubles come and I can't find an answer
          Lonely nights I spend in agony
          I have no other friend that I can turn to
          So here I am Lord back on my knees. 

          Chorus: 
          It's me again Lord,' I've got a prayer that needs an answer
          It's me again Lord, I've got a problem I can't solve
          Well I don't mean to worry you but here I am facing something new
          And I need help that only comes from You, it's me again Lord. 

          Well I know You're mighty busy in Your Heaven
          Forming worlds and hanging stars to shine
          But You promised if I'd ask I'd receive it
          So here I am Lord asking one more time. 

          Chorus: https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/its_not_enuff.php

      Won't you listen to what I've got to say to you
      It could be wrong but then again it could be true
      And if it's true, you need to take a second look 
      Just to see if what I'm telling you is by The Book
      You see, now many declare that they are preachin' the word
      And though they may sound mighty pretty what they say's absurd
      I'm am not eloquent, I know I may sound rough
      I'm just tryin' to make a simple point -- It's not enough
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/its_not_me.php

      I lie awake at night, thinkin' about what I've done
      I try to make it all right, but You're the only one
      That can change me inside and cleanse my soul again
      Without You I am lost forever
      What a wretched man I amhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/its_not_over.php

            If you are facing troubles
            And it seems you’re losing it
            And if you’ve been forsaken
            By your friends and loved ones

            It’s not over
            Until we win it’s not over
            It’s not over
            Until we win it’s never over


            The Lord Jesus promised
            To give us life in abundance
            So don’t be afraid
            Because it’s not over

            So just be strong
            For the Lord is with you
            So go ahead in this battle
            Because the VICTORY is ourshttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/its_only_the_first_day.php

      There's a secret sin that you live with
      And it's tearing you apart
      You've prayed and prayed but now you're ashamed
      To ask God to cleanse your heart
      But even though you've fallen again
      When you kneel before Him
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/its_real.php

              O how well do I remember
              How I doubted day by day,
              For I did not know for certain
              That my sins were washed away.
              When the Spirit tried to tell me,
              I would not the truth receive;
              I endeavored to be happy
              And to make myself believe.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/its_the%20blood.php

      There is a story, speaks of glory, so I've learned
      Knowing the Savior, new behavior, through His words
      Presence of power, at any hour, I am sure
      Through my trials, no denials, I'm secure
      You might not see why He cares
      So I need to share (I need to share His love)
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_a_home_prepared_where_the_saints_abide.php

              I’ve a home prepared where the saints abide,
              Just over in the glory land;
              And I long to be by my Savior’s side,
              Just over in the glory land.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_a_message_from_the_lord.php

            I’ve a message from the Lord, Hallelujah!
            The message unto you I’ll give;
            ’Tis recorded in His Word, Hallelujah!
            It is only that you “look and live."https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_a_savior_kind_and_tender.php

              I’ve a Savior, kind and tender,
              I’ve a Savior full of grace;
              And a smile of winning sweetness
              Ever beams upon His face:
              In my heart’s shrine of affection
              He shall hold the highest place.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_anchored_in_jesus.php

              Upon life’s boundless ocean where mighty billows roll,
              I’ve fixed my hope in Jesus, blest anchor of my soul;
              When trials fierce assail me as storms are gathering o’er,
              I rest upon His mercy and trust Him more.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_anchored_my_soul_in_the_haven_of_rest.php

              “I’ve anchored my soul in the Haven of Rest";
              I’ve pillowed my head on the dear Savior’s breast;
              I’m trusting His promise of mercy so free;
              Fear not, “For My grace is sufficient for thee."https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_been_changed.php

      Well I've been to the river, I've been baptized
      I've been washed in the blood of the Lamb
      I've been changed from the creature that once I was
      And redeemed is now my name (now my name)https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_believe_the_true_report.php

              I’ve believed the true report,
              Hallelujah to the Lamb!
              I have passed the outer court,
              O glory be to God!
              I am all on Jesus’ side,
              On the altar sanctified,
              To the world and sin I’ve died,
              Hallelujah to the Lamb!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_cast_my_heavy_burdens_away.php

              I致e cast my heavy burdens down on Canaan痴 happy shore,
              I知 living where the healing waters flow;
              I値l wander in the wilderness of doubt and sin no more;
              I知 living where the healing waters flow.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_enlisted.php

              I’ve enlisted in the army of the Lord today,
              Fighting ever for the truth and right;
              Safely guided by Jehovah in the King’s highway,
              He will lead His army day and night.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_entered_the_land_dearly_bought_by_his_blood.php

              I’ve entered the land dearly bought by His blood,
              Passed over Jordan, surrendered to God;
              I’ve found His sufficiency here in this land,
              Glory to Jesus forever!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_found_a_friend.php

              I’ve found a Friend, O such a friend! He loved me ere I knew Him;
              He drew me with the cords of love, and thus He bound me to Him;
              And round my heart still closely twine those ties which naught can 
              sever,
              For I am His, and He is mine, forever and forever.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_found_a_friend_who_is_all_to_me.php

              I’ve found a Friend, Who is all to me,
              His love is ever true;
              I love to tell how He lifted me
              And what His grace can do for you.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_found_a_joy_in_sorrow.php

              I’ve found a joy in sorrow, a secret balm for pain,
              A beautiful tomorrow of sunshine after rain;
              I’ve found a branch of healing near every bitter spring;
              A whispered promise stealing o’er every broken string,
              A whispered promise stealing o’er every broken string.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_found_a_refuge.php

              I’ve found a refuge from life’s cares in Jesus,
              I am hiding in His love divine;
              He fully understands my soul’s deep longing,
              And He whispers softly, “Thou art Mine."https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_found_him.php

              Oh, I sought so long for something,
              That would give me joy and peace within;
              Till at last I came to Jesus
              And He cleansed my heart from ev’ry sin.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_found_it_at_last.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_found_it_at_last.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_found_the_pearl_of_greatest_price.php

              I’ve found the Pearl of greatest price,
              My heart doth sing for joy;
              And sing I must, for Christ is mine;
              Christ shall my song employ.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_found_the_secret_of_success.php

              I’ve found the secret of success,
              ’Tis holding, ’tis holding on;
              The way to every blessedness,
              ’Tis holding, ’tis holding on;
              Our warfare may be hard and fierce,
              Oft Satan’s arrows wound and pierce,
              But still we get more smiles than tears
              By holding on, by holding on.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_got_a_father.php

      I’ve got a Father
      We’ve got a Fatherhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_got_confidence.php

      When trouble is in my way
      I can't tell the night from day
      When I toss from side to side
      Like a ship on the raging tide
      I don't worry and I don't fret
      God has never failed me yet
      Troubles come from time to time
      But that's all right, 'cause I'm not the worrying kindhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_got_peace_like_a_river.php

              I’ve got peace like a river,
              I’ve got peace like a river,
              I’ve got peace like a river in my soul,
              I’ve got peace like a river,
              I’ve got peace like a river,
              I’ve got peace like a river in my soul.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_got_the_joy_of_the_lord.php

      I've got the joy of the Lord (I've got the joy of the)
      I've got the joy of the Lord (I've got the joy of the)
      I've got the joy of the Lord (I've got the joy of the)
      Oh, I've got the joy of the Lord (I've got the joy of the, joy of the 
      Lord)
      I've got the joy of the Lord
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_got_the_spirit.php

      Chorus:
      I've got the Spirit
      The Spirit within me
      I've got the joy
      Down deep in my soul
      I've got a feelin'
      A wonderful feelin'
      I've got the Spirit
      And He's takin' controlhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_never_been_this_homesick_before.php

      There's a light in the window
      And the table's set in splendor
      Someone's standing by the open door (open door)
      I can see a crystal river
      Oh I must be near forever
      And I've never been this homesick before
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_pitched_my_tent_in_beulah.php

              I long ago left Egypt for the promised land,
              I trusted in my Savior, and to His guiding hand;
              He led me out to vict’ry through the great Red Sea,
              I sang a song of triumph, and shouted, I am free!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_reached_the_land_of_corn_and_wine.php

              I’ve reached the land of corn and wine,
              And all its riches freely mine;
              Here shines undimmed one blissful day,
              For all my night has passed away.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_seen_the_lightning_flashing.php

              I’ve seen the lightning flashing, I’ve heard the thunder roll.
              I’ve felt sin’s breakers dashing, which almost conquered my soul.
              I’ve heard the voice of my Savior, bidding me still to fight on.
              He promised never to leave me, never to leave me alone!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_touched_the_hem_of_his_garment.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_tried_in_vain_a_thousand_ways.php

              I’ve tried in vain a thousand ways
              My fears to quell, my hopes to raise;
              But what I need, the Bible says,
              Is ever, only Jesus.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ive_wandered_far_away_from_god.php

              I致e wandered far away from God,
              Now I知 coming home;
              The paths of sin too long I致e trod,
              Lord, I知 coming home.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_i/ivory_places.php

              My Lord has garments so wondrous fine,
              And myrrh their texture fills;
              Its fragrance reached to this heart of mine
              With joy my being thrills.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jehovah_god_the_father_bless.php

        Jehovah, God the Father, bless,
        And Thy own work defend!
        With mercy’s outstretched arms embrace
        And keep us to the end!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jehovah_god_thy_gracious_power.php

                             Jehovah, God, Thy gracious power,
                             On every hand we see;
                             Oh, may the blessings of each hour
                             Lead all our thoughts to Thee.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jehovah_hear_thee_in_thy_grief.php

                               Jehovah hear thee in thy grief,
                               Our fathers’ God defend thee still,
                               Send from His holy place relief,
                               And strengthen thee from Zion’s hill.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jehovah_is_my_light.php

                                 Jehovah is my Light,
                                 And my Salvation near;
                                 Who shall my soul affright,
                                 Or cause my heart to fear?
                                 While God my strength, my life sustains,
                                 Secure from fear my soul remains.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jehovah_is_our_king.php

        We will not serve your god
        Jehovah is our King
        https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jehovah_is_our_strength.php

                                   Jehovah is our Strength,
                                   And He shall be our Song
                                   We shall o’ercome at length
                                   Although our foes be strong.
                                   In vain does Satan then oppose,
                                   For God is stronger than His foes.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jehovah_jireh.php
Jehovah Jireh, my Provider
His grace is sufficient for me
For me, for me!
Jehovah Jireh, my Provider
His grace is sufficient for me

My God shall provide all my needs
According to His riches in glory
He shall give His angels charge over me
Jehovah Jireh cares for me
For me, for me!
Jehovah Jireh cares for me

Jehovah Jireh, my Provider
His grace is sufficient for me
For me, for me!
Jehovah Jireh, my Provider
His grace is sufficient for me

My God shall provide all my needs
According to His riches in glory
He shall give His angels charge over me
Jehovah Jireh cares for me
For me, for me!
Jehovah Jireh cares for mehttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jehovah_reigns_in_majesty.php

                                         Jehovah reigns in majesty,
                                         Let all the nations quake;
                                         He dwells between the cherubim,
                                         Let earth’s foundations shake.
                                         Supreme in Zion is the Lord,
                                         Exalted gloriously,
                                         Ye nations, praise His Name with awe,
                                         The Holy One is He.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jehovah_reigns_on_high.php



JEHOVAH reigns on high
In peerless majesty;
Boundless power his royal robe,
Purest light his garment is;
Rules his word the spacious globe,
Stablished it in floating seas.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jehovah_reigns_let_earth_be_glad.php

                                           Jehovah reigns, let earth be glad,
                                           And all the isles their joy make 
                                           known;
                                           With clouds and darkness He is clad,
                                           On truth and justice rests His 
                                           throne.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jehovah_god_thy_gracious_power.php

                             Jehovah, God, Thy gracious power,
                             On every hand we see;
                             Oh, may the blessings of each hour
                             Lead all our thoughts to Thee.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jehovah_god_who_dwelt_of_old.php

                             Jehovah, God, Who dwelt of old
                             In temples made with hands,
                             Thy power display, Thy truth unfold,
                             Where this new temple stands.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jehovah_let_me_now_adore_thee.php

                                     Jehovah, let me now adore Thee,
                                     For where is there a God, such, Lord, as 
                                     Thou?
                                     With songs I fain would come before Thee;
                                     O let Thy Holy Spirit teach me now
                                     To praise Thee in His Name through Whom 
                                     alone
                                     Our songs can please Thee, through Thy 
                                     blessèd Son.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jehovah_my_god_on_thy_help_i_depend.php

                                       Jehovah, my God, on Thy help I depend;
                                       From all that pursue me O save and 
                                       defend;
                                       Lest they like a lion should rend me at 
                                       will:
                                       While no one is near me their raging to 
                                       still.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jehovah_thee_we_praise.php

                                               Jehovah, Thee we praise,
                                               The triune God adore;
                                               To Father, Son and Spirit raise
                                               Glad anthems evermore,
                                               Glad anthems evermore.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jehovah_to_my_prayer_give_ear.php

                                                 Jehovah, to my prayer give ear,
                                                 Nor hide Thee from my cry;
                                                 Attend my sad complaint, and 
                                                 hear
                                                 My restless moan and sigh.
                                                 My enemies lift up their voice,
                                                 The violent oppress;
                                                 To do me wrong my foes rejoice,
                                                 And love my soul’s distress.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jehovahs_perfect_law.php

                                                   Jehovah’s perfect law
                                                   Restores the soul again;
                                                   His testimony sure
                                                   Gives wisdom to men;
                                                   The precepts of the Lord are 
                                                   right,
                                                   And fill the heart with great 
                                                   delight.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jericho.php
Down, down, down
And the walls of Jericho are coming down
Down, down, down
Yes, the walls of Jericho are coming downhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jerusalem.php

                                                     And did those feet in 
                                                     ancient time
                                                     Walk upon England’s 
                                                     mountains green?
                                                     And was the Holy Lamb of 
                                                     God
                                                     On England’s pleasant 
                                                     pastures seen?
                                                     And did the countenance 
                                                     divine
                                                     Shine forth upon our 
                                                     clouded hills?
                                                     And was Jerusalem builded 
                                                     here
                                                     Among these dark satanic 
                                                     mills?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jerusalem_high_tower.php
Jerusalem! high tower thy glorious walls,
would God I were in thee!
Desire of thee my longing heart enthralls,
desire at home to be;
wide from the world outleaping,
o'er hill and vale and plain,
my soul's strong wind is sweeping
thy portals to attain.

O gladsome day and yet more gladsome hour!
When shall that hour have come
when my rejoicing soul its own free power
may use in going home,
itself to Jesus giving
in trust to his own hand,
to dwell among the living
in that blest fatherland?

Unnumbered choirs before the Lamb's high throne
there shout the jubilee,
with loud resounding peal and sweetest tone,
in blissful ecstasy:
a hundred thousand voices
take up the wondrous song;
eternity rejoices
God's praises to prolong.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jerusalem_on_high.php

                                                             Jerusalem on high, 
                                                             my song that city 
                                                             is,
                                                             My home whene’er I 
                                                             die, the center of 
                                                             my bliss;
                                                             O happy place! When 
                                                             shall I be,
                                                             My God, with Thee, 
                                                             to see Thy face?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jerusalem_the_golden.php

                                                               Jerusalem the 
                                                               golden, with milk 
                                                               and honey blest,
                                                               Beneath thy 
                                                               contemplation 
                                                               sink heart and 
                                                               voice oppressed.
                                                               I know not, O I 
                                                               know not, what 
                                                               joys await us 
                                                               there,
                                                               What radiancy of 
                                                               glory, what bliss 
                                                               beyond compare.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jerusalem_thou_city_fair_and_high.php



1. Jerusalem, thou city fair and high,
Would God I were in thee!
My longing heart fain, fain to thee would fly,
It will not stay with me.
Far over vale and mountain,
Far over field and plain,
It hastes to seek its Fountain
And leave this world of pain.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jerusalem_high_tower.php
Jerusalem! high tower thy glorious walls,
would God I were in thee!
Desire of thee my longing heart enthralls,
desire at home to be;
wide from the world outleaping,
o'er hill and vale and plain,
my soul's strong wind is sweeping
thy portals to attain.

O gladsome day and yet more gladsome hour!
When shall that hour have come
when my rejoicing soul its own free power
may use in going home,
itself to Jesus giving
in trust to his own hand,
to dwell among the living
in that blest fatherland?

Unnumbered choirs before the Lamb's high throne
there shout the jubilee,
with loud resounding peal and sweetest tone,
in blissful ecstasy:
a hundred thousand voices
take up the wondrous song;
eternity rejoices
God's praises to prolong.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jerusalem_arise.php

                                                       Jerusalem, arise,
                                                       The heavenly glory view;
                                                       The light is come, lift 
                                                       up thine eyes,
                                                       All things are now made 
                                                       new.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jerusalem_jerusalem.php

                                                         Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
                                                         Thou city ever blest,
                                                         Within thy portals 
                                                         first I find
                                                         My safety, peace and 
                                                         rest.
                                                         Here dangers always 
                                                         threaten me,
                                                         My days in strife are 
                                                         spent,
                                                         And labor, sorrow, 
                                                         worry, grief,
                                                         I find at best their 
                                                         strength.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jerusalem_lift_up_thy_voice.php

                                                           Jerusalem, lift up 
                                                           thy voice!
                                                           Daughter of Zion, now 
                                                           rejoice!
                                                           Thy King is come, 
                                                           Whose mighty hand
                                                           Henceforth shall 
                                                           reign o’er every 
                                                           land.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jerusalem_my_happy_home.php

                                                             Jerusalem, my happy 
                                                             home,
                                                             When shall I come 
                                                             to thee?
                                                             When shall my 
                                                             sorrows have an 
                                                             end?
                                                             Thy joys when shall 
                                                             I see?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jerusalem_thou_city_bright.php

                                                                 Jerusalem, thou 
                                                                 City bright
                                                                 From Heav’n to 
                                                                 earth 
                                                                 descending,
                                                                 How wondrously 
                                                                 their holy 
                                                                 light
                                                                 Thy precious 
                                                                 stones are 
                                                                 blending.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesu_hail_o_god_most_holy.php

                                                                         Jesu 
                                                                         hail! O 
                                                                         God 
                                                                         most 
                                                                         holy,
                                                                         Gentle 
                                                                         Lamb, 
                                                                         an 
                                                                         Infant 
                                                                         lowly;
                                                                         Born, 
                                                                         great 
                                                                         God, a 
                                                                         human 
                                                                         stranger,
                                                                         Laid 
                                                                         within 
                                                                         the 
                                                                         narrow 
                                                                         manger:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesu_who_this_our_lenton_tide.php
Jesu, who this our Lenten-tide
Of abstinence hast sanctified,
Be with thy Church in saving power
In this her penitential hour.

And, as thou dost forgive the past,
Thy sheltering arms around us cast,
That we may in thy grace remain
And fall not back to sins again.

Make, Lord, this Lenten discipline
An expiation for our sin;
And through these days ourselves prepare
The joys of Eastertide to share.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesu_for_the_beacon-light.php

                                                                   Jesu, for the 
                                                                   beacon-light
                                                                   By Thy holy 
                                                                   Doctors 
                                                                   given,
                                                                   When the 
                                                                   mists of 
                                                                   error’s 
                                                                   night,
                                                                   Gathered o’er 
                                                                   the path to 
                                                                   Heav’n;
                                                                   For the 
                                                                   witness that 
                                                                   they bare
                                                                   To the truth 
                                                                   they learned 
                                                                   of Thee,
                                                                   For the glory 
                                                                   that they 
                                                                   share,
                                                                   Let our 
                                                                   praise 
                                                                   accepted be.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesu_grant_me_this_i_pray.php

                                                                       Jesu, 
                                                                       grant me 
                                                                       this, I 
                                                                       pray,
                                                                       Ever in 
                                                                       Thy heart 
                                                                       to stay;
                                                                       Let me 
                                                                       evermore 
                                                                       abide
                                                                       Hidden in 
                                                                       Thy 
                                                                       wounded 
                                                                       side.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesu_joy_of_man's_desiring.php

                                                                           Jesu, 
                                                                           joy 
                                                                           of 
                                                                           man’s 
                                                                           desiring,
                                                                           Holy 
                                                                           wisdom, 
                                                                           love 
                                                                           most 
                                                                           bright;
                                                                           Drawn 
                                                                           by 
                                                                           Thee, 
                                                                           our 
                                                                           souls 
                                                                           aspiring
                                                                           Soar 
                                                                           to 
                                                                           uncreated 
                                                                           light.
                                                                           Word 
                                                                           of 
                                                                           God, 
                                                                           our 
                                                                           flesh 
                                                                           that 
                                                                           fashioned,
                                                                           With 
                                                                           the 
                                                                           fire 
                                                                           of 
                                                                           life 
                                                                           impassioned,
                                                                           Striving 
                                                                           still 
                                                                           to 
                                                                           truth 
                                                                           unknown,
                                                                           Soaring, 
                                                                           dying 
                                                                           round 
                                                                           Thy 
                                                                           throne.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesu_lord_of_life_and_glory.php

                                                                             Jesu, 
                                                                             Lord 
                                                                             of 
                                                                             life 
                                                                             and 
                                                                             glory,
                                                                             Bend 
                                                                             from 
                                                                             Heav’n 
                                                                             Thy 
                                                                             gracious 
                                                                             ear;
                                                                             While 
                                                                             our 
                                                                             waiting 
                                                                             souls 
                                                                             adore 
                                                                             Thee,
                                                                             Friend 
                                                                             of 
                                                                             helpless 
                                                                             sinners, 
                                                                             hear:
                                                                             By 
                                                                             Thy 
                                                                             mercy, 
                                                                             O 
                                                                             deliver 
                                                                             us, 
                                                                             good 
                                                                             Lord.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesu_meek_and_lowly.php

                                                                               Jesu, 
                                                                               meek 
                                                                               and 
                                                                               lowly,
                                                                               Savior, 
                                                                               pure 
                                                                               and 
                                                                               holy,
                                                                               On 
                                                                               Thy 
                                                                               love 
                                                                               relying
                                                                               Hear 
                                                                               me 
                                                                               humbly 
                                                                               crying.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesu_my_savior_brother_friend.php

                                                                                 Jesu, my Savior, Brother, Friend,
                                                                                 On Whom I cast my every care,
                                                                                 On Whom for all things I depend,
                                                                                 Inspire, and then accept, my prayer.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesu_name_all_names_above.php

                                                                                   Jesu! Name all names above,
                                                                                   Jesu, best and dearest,
                                                                                   Jesu, fount of perfect love,
                                                                                   Holiest, tenderest, nearest;
                                                                                   Jesu, source of grace completest,
                                                                                   Jesu purest, Jesu sweetest,
                                                                                   Jesu well of power divine,
                                                                                   Make me, keep me, seal me Thine.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesu_our_hope_our_hearts_desire.php

                                                                                     Jesu, our Hope, our heart’s Desire,
                                                                                     Thy work of grace we sing;
                                                                                     Redeemer of the world art Thou,
                                                                                     Its Maker and its King.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesu_our_lenten_fast_of_thee.php

                                                                                       Jesu, our Lenten fast of Thee
                                                                                       We duteous learn to keep,
                                                                                       A healing time, by Thy decree,
                                                                                       For all Thy wounded sheep.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesu_speak_to_me_in_love.php

                                                                                         Jesu! speak to me in love,
                                                                                         Restless, storm tossed in my sin;
                                                                                         With Thy mighty voice, O Lord,
                                                                                         Thy great calm create within;
                                                                                         Bid the stormy winds to cease,
                                                                                         Bid, O bid me go in peace.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesu_the-fathers_only_son.php

                                                                                           Jesu, the Father’s only Son,
                                                                                           Whose death for all redemption won;
                                                                                           Before the worlds of God most high
                                                                                           Begotten all ineffably.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesu_the_very_thought_is_sweet.php

                                                                                             Jesu! the very thought is sweet!
                                                                                             In that dear Name all heart-joys meet;
                                                                                             But sweeter than the honey far
                                                                                             The glimpses of His presence are.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesu_the_virgins_crown.php

                                                                                               Jesu, the virgins’ Crown, do Thou
                                                                                               Accept us as in prayer we bow,
                                                                                               Born of that virgin whom alone
                                                                                               The mother and the maid we own.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesu_the_worlds_redeeming_lord.php

                                                                                                 Jesu, the world’s redeeming Lord,
                                                                                                 The Father’s co-eternal Word,
                                                                                                 Of light invisible true Light,
                                                                                                 Thine Israel’s Keeper day and night.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesu_thy_mercies_are_untold.php

                                                                                                   Jesu, Thy mercies are untold
                                                                                                   Through each returning day;
                                                                                                   Thy love exceeds a thousandfold
                                                                                                   Whatever we can say.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_a_child_his_work_begun.php

                                                                                                     Jesus a child His work begun:
                                                                                                     How radiant dawned His heavenly day!
                                                                                                     And those who such a race would run
                                                                                                     As early should be on their way.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_all_my_gladness.php
Jesus, all my gladness,
my repose in sadness,
Jesus, heaven to me;
ah, my heart long paineth,
ah, my spirit straineth,
longeth after thee!
Thine I am, O holy Lamb;
only where thou art is pleasure,
thee alone I treasure.

Hence with earthly treasure:
thou art all my pleasure,
Jesus my desire!
Hence, for pomps I care not,
e'en as though they were not
rank and fortune's hire.
Want and gloom, cross, death, and tomb;
nought that I may suffer ever
shall from Jesus sever.

Flee, dark clouds that lower,
for my joy-bestower,
Jesus, enters in!
Joy from tribulation,
hope from desolation,
they who love God win.
Be it blame or scorn or shame,
thou art with me in earth's sadness,
Jesus, all my gladness.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_all_to_me.php



My Jesus died for me upon the cross,
There for Him I’ve counted all but loss;
When my soul beheld Him on the tree,
Conscience said His dying was for me:
All my heart was captured by His love,
Filled with glory streaming from above.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_and_shall_it_ever_be.php

                                                                                                       Jesus, and shall it ever be,
                                                                                                       A mortal man, ashamed of Thee?
                                                                                                       Ashamed of Thee, whom angels praise,
                                                                                                       Whose glories shine through endless days?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_arms.php

      Chorus:
      Jesus got His arms all around me
      Jesus got His arms all around mehttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_blessed_jesus.php

                                                                                                           There’s One Who can comfort when all else fails,
                                                                                                           Jesus, blessèd Jesus;
                                                                                                           A Savior Who saves tho’ the foe assails,
                                                                                                           Jesus, blessèd Jesus:
                                                                                                           Once He traveled the way we go,
                                                                                                           Felt the pangs of deceit and woe;
                                                                                                           Who more perfectly then can know,
                                                                                                           Than Jesus, blessèd Jesus?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_brightness_of_the_father.php

                                                                                                             Jesus, Brightness of the Father,
                                                                                                             Life and Strength of all who live,
                                                                                                             For creating guardian angels
                                                                                                             Glory to Thy Name we give
                                                                                                             And Thy wondrous praise rehearse,
                                                                                                             Singing in harmonious verse.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_calls_us_over_the_tummit.php

                                                                                                               Jesus calls us over the tumult
                                                                                                               Of our life’s wild, restless, sea;
                                                                                                               Day by day His sweet voice soundeth,
                                                                                                               Saying, “Christian, follow Me!"https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_came_down_my_ransom_to_be.php

                                                                                                                 Jesus came down my ransom to be;
                                                                                                                 O it was wonderful love!
                                                                                                                 For out of the Father’s heart He came,
                                                                                                                 To die me for me on a cross of shame,
                                                                                                                 And from sin’s bondage to reclaim;
                                                                                                                 O it was wonderful love!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_came_into_my_heart_one_day.php

  Jesus came into my heart one day,
  Taking my burdens and sins away,
  Bringing a peace that ever stays;
  Wonderful, boundless peace.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_came_to_earth_by_a_lowly_birth.php

    Jesus came to earth by a lowly birth,
    Gave Himself as an offering of matchless worth;
    To His own He came in His Father’s Name,
    But they scorned to receive Him their King.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_came_the_heavens_adoring.php

                                                                                                                   Jesus came, the heav’ns adoring,
                                                                                                                   Came with peace from realms on high;
                                                                                                                   Jesus came for man’s redemption,
                                                                                                                   Lowly came on earth to die.
                                                                                                                   Alleluia! Alleluia!
                                                                                                                   Came in deep humility.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_carol.php

      Merry, merry, merry, Merry Christmas
      Merry, merry, merry, Merry Christmas
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_christ_from_death_hath_risen.php
Jesus Christ from death hath risen!
Lo, his Godhead bursts the prison,
while his Manhood passes free,
vanquishing our misery:
risen with him to salvation
through his self-humiliation,
we may share his victory.

Far be sorrow, tears and sadness!
See the dayspring of our gladness!
Satan's slaves no more are we,
children by the Son set free:
rise, for Life with death hath striven,
all the snares of hell are riven;
rise and claim the victory.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_christ_is_risen.php
Jesus Christ is risen:
the feast, good Christians, therefore keep;
the Lamb has bled to save the sheep
Christ innocent, our ransom paid,
mankind and God at one hath made:
Alleluia, alleluia!

Jesus Christ is risen:
speak, Mary Magdalen, and say
what sawest thou upon the way?
"I saw the grave, and there adored
the glory of the risen Lord:"
Alleluia, alleluia!

Jesus Christ is risen:
"Within the grave on either hand
I saw a white-robed angel stand;
my Savior Christ, my hope, my stay,
hath risen from the tomb today:"
Alleluia, alleluia!

Jesus Christ is risen:
we know for certain, truth to tell,
that Christ arose from death and hell;
and while thy Paschal song we sing,
have pity on us, Victor-King:
Alleluia, alleluia!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_christ_is_risen_today.php

                                                                                                                     Jesus Christ is risen today, Alleluia!
                                                                                                                     Our triumphant holy day, Alleluia!
                                                                                                                     Who did once, upon the cross, Alleluia!
                                                                                                                     Suffer to redeem our loss, Alleluia!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_christ_our_lord_most_holy.php
Jesus Christ, our Lord most holy,
    Lamb of God so pure and lowly,
    Blameless, blameless, on the cross art offered,
    Sinless, sinless, for our sins hast suffered.
    https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_christ_my_sure_defense.php

                                                                                                                       Jesus Christ, my sure Defense
                                                                                                                       And my Savior, ever liveth;
                                                                                                                       Knowing this, my confidence
                                                                                                                       Rests upon the hope it giveth
                                                                                                                       Though the night of death be fraught
                                                                                                                       Still with many an anxious thought.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_christ_our_blesses_savior.php

                                                                                                                         Jesus Christ, our blessèd Savior,
                                                                                                                         Turned away God’s wrath forever;
                                                                                                                         By His bitter grief and woe
                                                                                                                         He saved us from the evil Foe.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_come_to_us.php

(Refrain)https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_comes_with_all_his_grace.php
Jesus comes with all his grace,
Comes to save a fallen race:
Object of our glorious hope,
Jesus comes to lift us up.
Alleluia!

Let the living stones cry out;
Let the seed of Abraham shout;
Praise we all our lowly King,
Give him thanks, rejoice, and sing.
Alleluia!

He has our salvation wrought,
He our captive souls has bought,
He has reconciled to God,
He has washed us in his blood.
Alleluia!

We are now his lawful right,
Walk as children of the light;
We shall soon obtain the grace,
Pure in heart, to see his face.
Alleluia!

We shall gain our calling's prize;
After God we all shall rise,
Filled with joy, and love, and peace,
Perfected in holiness.
Alleluia!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_comes_with_power.php

        Jesus comes with power to gladden, when love shines in,
        Every life that woe can sadden, when love shines in.
        Love will teach us how to pray, love will drive the gloom away,
        Turn our darkness into day, when love shines in.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_comes_he_comes_in_glory.php

      Jesus comes, He comes in glory,
      Echoes through the ages hoary
      Blessèd hope and thrilling story,
      Hallelujah! Jesus comes!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_from_thy_throne_on_high.php
Jesus, from thy throne on high,
far above the bright blue sky,
look on us with loving eye:
hear us, holy Jesus.

Little hearts may love thee well,
little lips thy love may tell,
little hymns thy praises swell:
hear us, holy Jesus.

Little deeds of love may shine,
little lives may be divine,
little ones be wholly thine:
hear us, holy Jesus.

Be thou with us every day,
in our work and in our play,
when we learn and when we pray:
hear us, holy Jesus.

May our thoughts be undefiled,
may our words be true and mild,
make us each a holy child:
hear us, holy Jesus.

Jesus, from thy heavenly throne,
watching o'er each little one,
till our life on earth in done:
hear us, holy Jesus.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_from_whom_all_blessings_flow.php

        Jesus, from whom all blessings flow,
        Great Builder of Thy church below,
        If now Thy Spirit moves my breast,
        Hear, and fulfill Thine own request!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_gave_me_water.php

      Hey, Lord
      Don't you know that my
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_gentlest_savior.php
Jesus, gentlest Savior,
God of might and power,
thou thyself art dwelling
in us at this hour.

Nature cannot hold thee,
heaven is all too strait
for thine endless glory
and thy royal state.

Out beyond the shining
of the furthest star
thou art ever stretching
infinitely far.

Yet the hearts of children
hold what worlds cannot,
and the God of wonders
loves the lowly spot.

Jesus, gentlest Savior,
dwelling in us now,
fill us full of goodness
till our hearts o'erflow.

Multiply our graces,
chiefly love and fear,
and, dear Lord, the chiefest,
grace to persevere.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_gentlest_savior.php
Jesus, gentlest Savior,
God of might and power,
thou thyself art dwelling
in us at this hour.

Nature cannot hold thee,
heaven is all too strait
for thine endless glory
and thy royal state.

Out beyond the shining
of the furthest star
thou art ever stretching
infinitely far.

Yet the hearts of children
hold what worlds cannot,
and the God of wonders
loves the lowly spot.

Jesus, gentlest Savior,
dwelling in us now,
fill us full of goodness
till our hearts o'erflow.

Multiply our graces,
chiefly love and fear,
and, dear Lord, the chiefest,
grace to persevere.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_grant_me_this.php
Jesus, grant me this, I pray,
ever in thy heart to stay;
let me evermore abide
hidden in thy wounded side.

If the evil one prepare,
or the world, a tempting snare,
I am safe when I abide
in thy heart and wounded side.

If the flesh, more dangerous still,
tempt my soul to deeds of ill,
naught I fear when I abide
in thy heart and wounded side.

Death will come one day to me;
Jesus, cast me not from thee:
dying let me still abide
in thy heart and wounded side.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_grant_us_all_a_blessing.php



1. Jesus, Grant Us All A Blessing;
Send it down, Lord from above;
May we all go home a praising,
And rejoicing in thy love;
Farewell, brethren, farewell sisters,
Till we all shall meet again.

2. Jesus, pardon all our follies,
Since together we have been;
Make us humble, make us holy,
Cleanse us all from ev'ry sin;
Farewell, brethren, farewell sisters,
Till we all shall meet again.

3. May thy blessing, Lord, go with us,
To each one's respective home,
And the presence of our Jesus
Rest upon us ev'ry one;
Farewell, brethren, farewell sisters,
Till we all shall meet at home.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_has_a_table_spread.php

          Jesus has a table spread
          Where the saints of God are fed,
          He invites His chosen people, “Come and dine";
          With His manna He doth feed
          And supplies our every need:
          O ’tis sweet to sup with Jesus all the time!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_has_died_that_i_might_live.php
Jesus has died that I might live,
Might live to God alone,
In him eternal life receive,
And be in spirit one.

Saviour, I thank thee for the grace,
The gift unspeakable!
And wait with arms of faith to embrace,
And all thy love to feel.

My soul breaks out in strong desire
The perfect bliss to prove;
My longing heart is all on fire
To be dissolved in love.

Give me thyself - from every boast,
From every wish set free,
Let all I am in thee be lost;
But give thyself to me.

Thy gifts, alone, cannot suffice
Unless thyself be given;
Thy presence makes my paradise,
And where thou art is heaven.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_has_lifted_me.php

                                                                                                                                       Out of the depths to the glory above,
                                                                                                                                       I have been lifted in wonderful love;
                                                                                                                                       From every fetter my spirit is free,
                                                                                                                                       For Jesus has lifted me!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_has_loved_me.php

            Jesus has loved me—wonderful Savior!
            Jesus has loved me, I cannot tell why;
            Came He to rescue sinners all worthless,
            My heart He conquered—for Him I would die.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_heals.php



Have you heard the joyful sound?
Jesus heals, Jesus heals;
Through the Spirit we have found
Jesus heals, Jesus heals.
Yes, He heals the blind and lame,
And His pow’r is just the same
As when first to earth He came,
Jesus heals, Jesus heals.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_hear_me.php

        Savior, bless a little child;
        Teach my heart the way to Thee;
        Make it gentle, good and mild;
        Loving Savior, care for me.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_hears_me_when_i_pray.php



Jesus hears me when I pray,
He will never turn away;
He will listen to my call,
For He loves the children all.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_help_me.php

        Jesus, help me, I am weary,
        Let me hold Thy hand in mine;
        For the stream of living water,
        In a thirsty land I pine;
        O my Father, do not leave me,
        In this dark and dreadful hour,
        Fold me in Thy arms of mercy,
        Keep me from the tempter’s pow’r.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_high_in_glory.php

                                                                                                                                         Jesus, high in glory,
                                                                                                                                         Lend a listening ear;
                                                                                                                                         When we bow before Thee,
                                                                                                                                         Children’s praises hear.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_holy_undefiled.php

  Jesus, holy, undefiled,
  Listen to a little child;
  Thou hast sent the glorious light,
  Chasing far the silent night.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_hope_of_every_nation.php
Jesus, hope of every nation,
light of heaven upon our way;
promise of the world's salvation,
spring of life's eternal day!

Saints by faith on God depending
wait to see Messiah born;
sin's oppressive night is ending
in the glory of the dawn!

Look, he comes! the long - awaited
Christ, redeemer, living Word;
hope and faith are vindicated
as with joy we greet the Lord.

Glory in the highest heaven
to the Father, Spirit, Son,
on the earth all praise be given
to our God, the Three - in - One!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_i_will_never_leave.php



1. Jesus I will never leave,
Who for me Himself hath given;
Firmly unto Him I'll cleave
Nor from Him be ever driven.
Life from Him doth light receive,--
Jesus I will never leave.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_if_still_the_same_thou_art.php
Jesus, if still that same thou art,
If all thy promises are sure,
Set up thy kingdom in my heart,
And make me rich, for I am poor,
To me be all thy treasures given,
The kingdom of an inward heaven.

Thou hast pronounced the mourners blest;
And lo, for thee I ever mourn:
I cannot - no, I will not rest,
Till thou, my only rest, return;
Till thou, the Prince of Peace, appear,
And I receive the Comforter.

Where is the blessedness bestowed
On all that hunger after thee?
I hunger now, I thirst for God;
See the poor fainting sinner, see,
And satisfy with endless peace,
And fill me with thy righteousness.

Shine on thy work, disperse the gloom,
Light in thy light I then shall see;
Say to my soul: 'Thy light is come,
Glory divine is risen on thee,
Thy warfare's past, thy mourning's o'er;
Look up, for thou shalt weep no more!'https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_in_the_neighborhood.php

      He's in the neighborhood
      Neighborhood
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_in_the_usa.php

      My country 'tis of thee
      My Jesus can't you see I'm blue (hey, hey, hey)
      Well I went up to San Diego, L.A.
      On up to the tip top of Seattle in the trees and the rain
      California, Oregon, and Washington
      Beauty that surrounds you is clear, clean and clear
      But they've even got troubles
      In the Evergreen State
      People crying
      "Lord have mercy get me out of here"
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_invites_his_saints.php

                  Jesus invites His saints
                  To meet around His board;
                  Here pardoned rebels sit and hold
                  Communion with their Lord.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_is_all_i_wish_or_want.php



1. Jesus Is All I Wish or Want
For Him I pray, for Him I pant;
Let others after earth aspire,
Christ is the treasure I desire.

2. Possessed of Him, I ask no more;
He is an all-sufficient store;
To praise Him all my powers conspire 
Christ is the treasure I desire.

3. If He His smiling face but hide,
My soul no comfort has beside;
Distressed I after Him inquire 
Christ is the treasure I desire.

4. And while my heart is racked with pain,
Jesus appears and smiles again.
Why should my Savior thus retire?
Christ is the treasure I desire.

5. Come, humble souls, and view His charms,
Take refuge in His saving arms,
And sing, while you his worth admire,
"Christ is the Savior I desire."https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_is_all_the_world_to_me.php

                    Jesus is all the world to me, my life, my joy, my all;
                    He is my strength from day to day, without Him I would fall.
                    When I am sad, to Him I go, no other one can cheer me so;
                    When I am sad, He makes me glad, He’s my Friend.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_is_born.php
Christian 
lyrics online will lead you to thousands of lyrics to hymns, choruses, worship 
songs and gospel recordings. Free Christian hymn lyrics include popular hymns, 
both new and old, traditional and modern, as well as rare and hard-to-find 
hymns. We have been online since 2004 and have reached over 1 million people in 
over 150 countries worldwide. In 2007, this site became the largest Christian 
lyrics site on the entire internet. 

© 2011
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_is_calling.php

                Jesus is calling! Forth to the fray,
                In line be falling, serve Him today;
                Follow Him ever, call no retreat,
                His soldiers never suffer defeat.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_is_calling_for_me.php



Drifting away from the peaceful fold,
Drifting far out in the storm and cold;
Sinner, oh, turn from your dreadful plight,
Jesus is calling for thee tonight.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_is_calling_his_people_html.php



Jesus is calling His people again,
Back to the glorified heavenly plain,
Home to the city of purity bright,
Out from sin Babel’s confusion and night.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_is_calling_the_children.php



Jesus is calling the children,
Calling, yes, calling today;
Oh, will you walk in His footsteps—
Walk in the beautiful way?
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_is_coming.php

  Jesus is coming! O sing the glad word!
  Coming for those He redeemed by His blood,
  Coming to reign as the glorified Lord!
  Jesus is coming again!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_is_coming_again.php

    Lift up the trumpet, and loud let it ring:
    Jesus is coming again!
    Cheer up, ye pilgrims, be joyful and sing:
    Jesus is coming again!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_is_coming_to_earth_again.php

                  Jesus is coming to earth again; what if it were today?
                  Coming in power and love to reign; what if it were today?
                  Coming to claim His chosen Bride, all the redeemed and 
                  purified,
                  Over this whole earth scattered wide; what if it were today?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_is_god.php

      Jesus is God! The solid earth,
      The ocean broad and bright,
      The countless stars like golden dust,
      That strew the sky at night,
      The wheeling storm, the dreadful fire,
      The pleasant wholesome air,
      The summer’s sun, the winter’s frost,
      His own creation were.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_is_good_to_me.php



Jesus has been so good to me,
No other friend so kind could be;
Safely keeps me every day
Free from sin and in the way;
Ne’er can I such love repay,
He’s so good to me.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_is_just_alright.php

      Chorus:
      Jesus is just alright with me (Jesus)
      Jesus is just alright, oh yah (woh Jesus)
      Jesus is just alright with me (Jesus)
      Jesus is just alright
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_is_love.php
Father
        Help Your children
        And don't let them fall
        By the side of the road, mmm...mmm...

        And teach them
        To love one another
        That Heaven might find
        A place in their hearts

        'Cause Jesus is love
        He won't let you down
        And I know He's mine forever
        Oh, in my heart

        We've got to walk on
        Walk on through temptation
        'Cause His love and His wisdom
        Will be our helpin' hand

        And I know the Truth
        And His words will be our salvation
        Lift up our hearts
        To be thankful and glad

        That Jesus is love
        He won't let you down
        And I know He's mine
        Deep down in my soul

        Jesus is love
        Oh, yes, He is
        He won't let you down
        And I know He's mine, He's mine, He's mine, He's mine, all mine
        Forever, oh, in my heart
        Help me, heart, heart
        Ooh...ooh...

        (Deep in my heart)
        I know, I know, I know, I know
        Ah, 'cause His love's the power (Power)
        His love's the glory (Glory)
        Forever (Ever and ever)

        Ooh, yeah (Yeah, yeah)
        Ooh, yeah (Yeah, yeah)
        Ooh, yeah, yeah (Yeah, yeah)

        I wanna follow your star
        Wherever it leads me
        And I don't mind, Lord
        I hope you don't mind

        I wanna walk with you
        And talk with you
        And do all the things you want me to do
        'Cause I know that Jesus

        (Jesus is Love, I know) 'Cause I know, Lord
        (And if you ask, I'll show)
        (Love is the word forever) And ever and ever

        Who can bring you love (Jesus)
        Who can bring you joy (Jesus)
        Who can turn your life around (Jesus), oh

        Ooh, yeah (Yeah, yeah)
        Yeah (Yeah, yeah)
        Hey

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_is_mine.php

        Fade, fade, each earthly joy, Jesus is mine!
        Break every tender tie, Jesus is mine!
        Dark is the wilderness, Earth has no resting place,
        Jesus alone can bless, Jesus is mine!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_is_my_best_friends.php

          Jesus is my best of friends,
          None like Him ’mongst mortals born;
          And shall I whom He defends,
          Join the world, His goodness scorn?
          Naught shall raise a parting line
          To hold me from His tend’rest love;
          One shall be His will and mine
          Lifelong here, for aye above.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_is_my_shepherd.php



Jesus is my Shepherd, so kind and true,
Down where the living waters flow;
He calls for His own, He keepeth the “few,"
Where pastures of green ever grow.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_is_our_loving_savior.php

                    Jesus is our loving Savior,
                    He, our best, our constant Friend;
                    In His service life is pleasure,
                    For He loveth to the end.
                    Loving Savior, loving Savior,
                    Here we at Thy footstool bend,
                    Here we at Thy footstool bend.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_is_passing_this_way.php

  Is there a heart that is waiting,
  Longing for pardon today?
  Hear the glad message proclaiming,
  Jesus is passing this way.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_is_pleading_to_thee.php



Hear the gentle Spirit’s call,
Jesus is pleading for thee;
There is pardon free for all,
Jesus is pleading for thee.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_is_pleading_with_my_poor_soul.php

                      Jesus is pleading with my poor soul, shall I be saved 
                      tonight?
                      If I believe, He will make me whole, shall I be saved 
                      tonight?
                      Tenderly, sadly, I hear Him say, “How can you grieve me 
                      from day to day?"
                      Shall I go on in the old, old way, or shall I be saved 
                      tonight?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_is_standing_in_pilates_hall.php
Jesus is standing in Pilate's hall,
friendless, forsaken, betrayed by all;
hearken! what meaneth the sudden call?
What will you do with Jesus?

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_is_tenderly_calling_you_home.php

            Jesus is tenderly calling you home
            Calling today, calling today,
            Why from the sunshine of love will you roam,
            Farther and farther away?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_is_the_answer.php

      Chorus:
      Jesus is the Answer for the World Today
      Above Him there's no other, Jesus is the way
      Jesus is the Answer for the World Today
      Above Him there's no other, Jesus is the wayhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_is_the_childrens_savior.php
Bring the children all to Jesus,
For he is their dearest friend;
Having loved His precious jewels,
He will love them to the end.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_is_the_friend_you_need.php

              When the sun shines bright and your heart is light,
              Jesus is the Friend you need;
              When the clouds hang low in this world of woe,
              Jesus is the Friend you need.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_is_the_one.php

      Chorus:
      Jesus is the one who saved my soul
      He came to make a world of sinners whole (He came to make a world of 
      sinners whole, sinners whole)
      So if you are searching for a Savior, too (so if you are searching for Him 
      too, Him too remember)
      Remember Jesus gave Himself for youhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_is_the_sweetest_name_i_know.php

                There have been names that I have loved to hear,
                But never has there been a name so dear
                To this heart of mine, as the Name divine,
                The precious, precious Name of Jesus.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_is_trying_to_tell_you.php

      I had a dream I was walkin' with Saul (walkin', talkin')
      The Chrisitans he was chasing, he was killing them all
      Falling to his knees, it was God that he saw
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_is_your_ticket.php

      You can buy a ticket to Paris
      You can buy a ticket to Rome
      You can buy a ticket to Sweeden
      But you can't buy a ticket for that heavenly homehttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_jesus_full_of_all_compassion.php

        Jesus, Jesus, full of all compassion,
        Hear Thy humble suppliant’s cry;
        Let me know Thy great salvation,
        See, I languish, faint and die.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_jesus_jesus.php

                  Jesus! Jesus! Jesus!
                  Sing aloud the Name;
                  Till it softly, slowly,
                  Sets all hearts aflame.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_keep_me_every_day.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_knows.php



In your pathway have you found some cruel thorns?
Jesus bore them on His brow, and He knows;
Does the world look down upon you with its frown?
All the world forsook your Lord, and He knows.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_lamb_of_god_for_me.php

        Jesus, Lamb of God, for me
        Thou, the Lord of life, didst die;
        Whither—whither, but to Thee,
        Can a trembling sinner fly?
        Death’s dark waters o’er me roll,
        Save, O save, my sinking soul.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_lead_on.php
This is my 
                cry;   this is my song.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_lead_thou_on.php



1. Jesus, lead Thou on
Till our rest is won;
And although the way be cheerless,
We will follow calm and fearless.
Guide us by Thy hand
To our fatherland.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_leads.php

                          Like a shepherd, tender, true,
                          Jesus leads, Jesus leads,
                          Daily finds us pastures new,
                          Jesus leads, Jesus leads;
                          If thick mists are o’er the way,
                          Or the flock ’mid danger feeds,
                          He will watch them lest they stray,
                          Jesus leads, Jesus leads.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_let_all_thy_lovers_shine.php

                          Jesus, let all Thy lovers shine,
                          Illustrious as the sun;
                          And, bright with borrowed rays divine,
                          Their glorious circuit run.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_lives-2.php

                              Jesus lives! no longer now
                              Can thy terrors, death, appall us;
                              Jesus lives! by this we know
                              Thou, O grave, canst not enthrall us.
                              Alleluia!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_lives.php

                            Jesus lives! From riven tomb
                            He arose, triumphant, glorious!
                            Now hath He indeed become
                            By His death for aye victorious,
                            Lightnings flash, the earth is heaving;
                            Rent the grave! The Lord is living!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_lord_of_life_and_glory.php
Jesus, Lord of life and glory,
bend from heaven thy gracious ear;
while our waiting souls adore thee,
friend of helpless sinners, hear:
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_lover_of_my_soul.php

            Jesus, lover of my soul, let me to Thy bosom fly,
            While the nearer waters roll, while the tempest still is high.
            Hide me, O my Savior, hide, till the storm of life is past;
            Safe into the haven guide; O receive my soul at last.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_loves_even_me.php
1. I 
am so glad that our Father in Heav’n
Tells of His love in the Book He has giv’n;
Wonderful things in the Bible I see,
This is the dearest, that Jesus loves me.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_loves_me.php

                                          Jesus loves me! This I know,
                                          For the Bible tells me so.
                                          Little ones to Him belong;
                                          They are weak, but He is strong.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_loves_you.php



Little children, do not fear, Jesus loves you,
How He loves you, how He loves you;
He will fill your hearts with cheer, He will guide you,
Where we’ll never die.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_makes_me_whole.php



I hear celestial music strains
Resounding everywhere;
Their tidings fill Judea’s plains,
That Christ our sins did bear.
Yes, yes, yes, my heart from sin is freed,
Yes, free indeed.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_makes_my_heart_rejoice.php

                                            Jesus makes my heart rejoice,
                                            I’m His sheep, and know His voice;
                                            He’s a Shepherd, kind and gracious,
                                            And His pastures are delicious;
                                            Constant love to me He shows,
                                            Yea, my very name He knows.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_master_whom_i_serve.php
Jesus, Master, whom I serve,
though so feebly and so ill,
strengthen hand and heart and nerve
all thy bidding to fulfill;
open thou mine eyes to see
all the work thou hast done for me.

Lord, thou needest not, I know,
service such as I can bring;
yet I long to prove and show
full allegiance to my King.
Thou Redeemer art to me;
let me be a praise to thee.

Jesus, Master, wilt thou use
one who owes thee more than all?
As thou wilt! I would not choose;
only let me hear thy call.
Jesus! let me always be
in thy service glad and free.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_my_all_in_all.php

        Jesus, my Savior, I love and adore Thee,
        Jesus my all in all;
        Nothing on earth would I worship before Thee,
        Jesus my all in all.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_my_great_high_priest.php
Jesus, my great High Priest,
    Offered His blood and died;
    My guilty conscience seeks
    No sacrifice beside.
    His powerful blood did once atone,
    And now it pleads before the throne.
    https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_o_precious_name.php

        Jesus, O precious Name,
        By Heaven’s herald spoken,
        Jesus, O holy Name,
        Of love divine the token.
        Jesus, in Thy dear Name
        This new year we begin;
        Bless Thou its opening door,
        Inscribe Thy Name within.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_of_nazareth_passeth_by.php

                                                                          What 
                                                                          means 
                                                                          this 
                                                                          eager, 
                                                                          anxious 
                                                                          throng,
                                                                          Which 
                                                                          moves 
                                                                          with 
                                                                          busy 
                                                                          haste 
                                                                          along—
                                                                          These 
                                                                          wondrous 
                                                                          gath’rings 
                                                                          day by 
                                                                          day,
                                                                          What 
                                                                          means 
                                                                          this 
                                                                          strange 
                                                                          commotion, 
                                                                          pray?
                                                                          In 
                                                                          accents 
                                                                          hushed 
                                                                          the 
                                                                          throng 
                                                                          reply,
                                                                          “Jesus 
                                                                          of 
                                                                          Nazareth 
                                                                          passeth 
                                                                          by."
                                                                          In 
                                                                          accents 
                                                                          hushed 
                                                                          the 
                                                                          throng 
                                                                          reply,
                                                                          “Jesus 
                                                                          of 
                                                                          Nazareth 
                                                                          passeth 
                                                                          by."https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_only.php

                                                                            What 
                                                                            tho’ 
                                                                            clouds 
                                                                            are 
                                                                            hov’ring 
                                                                            o’er 
                                                                            me,
                                                                            And 
                                                                            I 
                                                                            seem 
                                                                            to 
                                                                            walk 
                                                                            alone—
                                                                            Longing 
                                                                            ’mid 
                                                                            my 
                                                                            cares 
                                                                            and 
                                                                            crosses,
                                                                            For 
                                                                            the 
                                                                            joys 
                                                                            that 
                                                                            now 
                                                                            are 
                                                                            flown—
                                                                            If 
                                                                            I’ve 
                                                                            Jesus, 
                                                                            “Jesus 
                                                                            only,"
                                                                            Then 
                                                                            my 
                                                                            sky 
                                                                            will 
                                                                            have 
                                                                            a 
                                                                            gem;
                                                                            He’s 
                                                                            a 
                                                                            Sun 
                                                                            of 
                                                                            brightest 
                                                                            splendor,
                                                                            And 
                                                                            the 
                                                                            Star 
                                                                            of 
                                                                            Bethlehem.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_only_is_our_message.php

                                                                              Jesus 
                                                                              only 
                                                                              is 
                                                                              our 
                                                                              message,
                                                                              Jesus 
                                                                              all 
                                                                              our 
                                                                              theme 
                                                                              shall 
                                                                              be;
                                                                              We 
                                                                              will 
                                                                              lift 
                                                                              up 
                                                                              Jesus 
                                                                              ever,
                                                                              Jesus 
                                                                              only 
                                                                              will 
                                                                              we 
                                                                              see.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_only_let_me_see.php

                                                                                For salvation full and free,
                                                                                Purchased once on Calvary,
                                                                                Christ alone shall be my plea—
                                                                                Jesus! Jesus only.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_opened_up_the_way.php

                                                                                    Jesus Christ the Lord opened up the way to glory
                                                                                    When He died to save us from our ruined state,
                                                                                    And He asks that we shall go tell the world the story,
                                                                                    How His blood will save them from their awful fate.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_our_love_is_crucified.php
O! come and mourn with me awhile,
See, Mary calls us to her side;
Oh! come and let us mourn with her,
Jesus, our Love, is crucified.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_our_savior_and_our_god.php



1. Jesus, Our Savior and Our God
Arrayed in majesty and blood;
Thou art our life; our souls in thee
Posses a full felicity.

2. All our immortal hopes are laid
In thee, our Surety and our Head;
Thy cross, thy cradle, and thy throne,
Are big with glories yet unknown.

3. Let atheists scoff and Jews blaspheme
Th'eternal life and Jesus' name;
A word of thy almighty breath
Dooms the rebellious world to death.

4. But let my soul forever lie
Beneath the blessings of thine eye;
'Tis heav'n on earth, 'tus heav'n above.
To see thy face and taste thy love.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_paid_it_all.php

                                                                                        I hear the Savior say,
                                                                                        “Thy strength indeed is small;
                                                                                        Child of weakness, watch and pray,
                                                                                        Find in Me thine all in all."https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_remember_me.php
Christian 
lyrics online will lead you to thousands of lyrics to hymns, choruses, worship 
songs and gospel recordings. Free Christian hymn lyrics include popular hymns, 
both new and old, traditional and modern, as well as rare and hard-to-find 
hymns. We have been online since 2004 and have reached over 1 million people in 
over 150 countries worldwide. In 2007, this site became the largest Christian 
lyrics site on the entire internet. 

© 2011
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_satisfies.php

    When Jesus no longer stands preciously nigh,
    When sorrows like sea billows roll;
    I look to the Rock that is higher than I,
    And peace, wondrous peace floods my soul.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_saves.php

      We have heard the joyful sound: Jesus saves! Jesus saves!
      Spread the tidings all around: Jesus saves! Jesus saves!
      Bear the news to every land, climb the mountains, cross the waves;
      Onward! ’tis our Lord’s command; Jesus saves! Jesus saves!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_savior_ever_mild.php
Jesus, Saviour ever mild,
Born for us a little child
Of the Virgin undefilied:
Hear us, holy Jesus.

Jesus, Son of God most high,
Who didst in the manger lie,
Who upon the cross didst die,
Hear us, holy Jesus.

From all pride and vain conceit,
From all spite and angry heat,
From all lying and deceit,
Save us, holy Jesus.

From refusing to obey,
From the love of our own way,
From forgetfulness to pray,
Save us, holy Jesus.

By the name we bow before,
Human name, which evermore
All the hosts of heaven adore,
Save us, holy Jesus.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_shall_reign.php

              Jesus shall reign where’er the sun
              Does his successive journeys run;
              His kingdom stretch from shore to shore,
              Till moons shall wax and wane no more.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_sinners_doth_receive.php

                Jesus sinners doth receive;
                Oh, may all this saying ponder
                Who in sin’s delusions live
                And from God and Heaven wander!
                Here is hope for all who grieve—
                Jesus sinners doth receive.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_son_of_righteousness.php
Jesus, Sun of righteousness,
brightest beam of love divine,
with the early morning rays
do thou on our darkness shine,
and dispel with purest light
all our night.

As on drooping herb and flower
falls the soft refreshing dew,
let thy Spirit's grace and power
all our weary souls renew;
showers of blessing over all
softly fall.

Like the sun's reviving ray,
may thy love with tender glow
all our coldness melt away,
warm and cheer us forth to go,
gladly serve thee and obey
all the day.

O our only Hope and Guide,
never leave us nor forsake;
keep us ever at thy side
till the eternal morning break;
moving on to Zion's hill,
homeward still.

Lead us all our days and years
in thy straight and narrow way;
lead us through the vale of tears
to the land of perfect day,
where thy people, fully blest,
safely rest.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_spreads_his_banner_oer_us.php

                    Jesus spreads his banner o’er us,
                    Cheers our famished souls with food;
                    He the banquet spreads before us,
                    Of His mystic flesh and blood.
                    Precious banquet, bread of heaven,
                    Wine of gladness, flowing free;
                    May we taste it, kindly given,
                    In remembrance, Lord, of Thee.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_stand_among_us.php
Jesus, stand among us 
              at the meeting of our lives,
              Be our sweet agreement at the meeting of our eyes;
              O, Jesus, we love You, so we gather here,
              Join our hearts in unity and take away our fear.

              So to You we're gathering out of each and every land,
              Christ the love between us at the joining of our hands;
              O, Jesus, we love You, so we gather here,
              Join our hearts in unity and take away our fear.

              Lead us, heavenly father
              Lead us, heavenly Father, lead us
              O'er the world's tempestuous sea;
              Guard us, guide us, keep us, feed us,
              For we have no help but thee;
              Yet possessing every blessing,
              If our God our Father be.

              Saviour, breathe forgiveness o'er us:
              All our weakness thou dost know;
              Thou didst tread this earth before us,
              Thou didst feel its keenest woe;
              Lone and dreary, faint and weary,
              Through the desert thou didst go.

              Spirit of our God, descending,
              Fill our hearts with heavenly joy,
              Love with every passion blending,
              Pleasure that can never cloy:
              Thus provided, pardoned, guided,
              Nothing can our peace destroy.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_sun_and_shield_thou_art.php
Jesus, sun and shield art thou,
Sun and shield for ever!
Never canst thou cease to shine,
Cease to guard us, never.
Cheer our steps as on we go,
Come between us and the foe.

Jesus, peace and joy art thou,
Joy and peace for ever!
Joy that fades not, changest not,
Peace that leaves us never.
Joy and peace we have in thee,
Now and through eternity.

Jesus, song and strength art thou,
Strength and song for ever!
Strength that never can decay,
Song that ceaseth never.
Still to us this strength and song
Through eternal days prolong.

Jesus, bread and wine art thou,
Wine and bread for ever!
Never canst thou cease to feed,
Or refresh us, never.
Feed we still on bread divine,
Drink we still of heavenly wine.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_the_crucified.php
Jesus, the Crucified, pleads for me,
while he is nailed to the shameful tree,
scorned and forsaken, derided and cursed,
see how his enemies do their worst!
Yet, in the midst of the torture and shame,
Jesus, the Crucified, breathes my name:
wonder of wonders, oh, can it be?
Jesus, the Crucified, pleads for me!

Lord, I have left thee, I have denied,
followed the world in my selfish pride;
Lord, I have joined in the hateful cry,
slay him, away with him, crucify!
Lord, I have done it, oh! ask me not how;
woven the thorns for thy tortured brow;
yet in his pity, so boundless and free,
Jesus, the Crucified, pleads for me!

"Though thou hast left me and wandered away,
chosen the darkness instead of the day;
though thou art covered with many a stain,
though thou hast wounded me oft and again;
though thou hast followed thy wayward will;
yet, in my pity, I love thee still."
Wonder of wonders it ever must be!
Jesus, the Crucified, pleads for me!

Jesus is dying, in agony sore,
Jesus is suffering more and more,
Jesus is bowed with the weight of his woe,
Jesus is faint with each bitter throe.
Jesus is bearing it all in my stead,
pity incarnate for me has bled;
wonder of wonders it ever must be!
Jesus, the Crucified, pleads for me!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_the_fathers_only_son.php
Jesus, the Father's only Son,
whose death for all redemption won;
before the worlds, of God most high
begotten all ineffably.

The Father's light and splendor thou,
their endless hope to thee that bow;
accept the prayers and praise today
that through the world thy servants pay.

Salvation's author, call to mind
how, taking form of humankind,
born of a Virgin undefiled,
thou in a man's flesh becam'st a child.

Thus testifies the present day,
through every year in long array,
that thou, salvation's source alone,
proceedest from the Father's throne.

Whence sky, and stars, and sea's abyss,
and earth, and all that therein is,
shall still, with laud and carol meet,
the Author of thine advent greet.

And we who, by thy precious blood
from sin redeemed, are marked for God,
on this the day that saw thy birth,
sing the new song of ransomed earth:

for that thine advent glory be,
O Jesus, Virgin-born, to thee;
with Father, and with Holy Ghost,
from men and from the heavenly host.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_the_gift_divine_i_know.php
Jesus, the gift divine I know,
The gift divine I ask of thee;
That living water now bestow -
Thy Spirit and thyself, on me;
Thou, Lord, of life the fountain art;
Now let me find thee in my heart.

Thee let me drink, and thirst no more
For drops of finite happiness;
Spring up, O well, in heavenly power,
In streams of pure perennial peace,
In joy that none can take away,
In life which shall for ever stay.

Father, on me the grace bestow,
Unblamable before thy sight,
Whence all the streams of mercy flow;
Mercy, thy own supreme delight,
To me, for Jesu's sake, impart,
And plant thy nature in my heart.

Thy mind throughout my life be shown,
While, listening to the sufferer's cry,
The widow's and the orphan's groan,
On mercy's wings I swiftly fly,
The poor and helpless to relieve,
My life, my all, for them to give.

Thus may I show the Spir't within,
Which purges me from every stain;
Unspotted from the world and sin,
My faith's integrity maintain;
The truth of my religion prove
By perfect purity and love.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_the_good_shepherd_is.php
Jesus the good Shepherd is,
Jesus died the sheep to save;
He is mine and I am his,
All I want in him I have;
Life, and health, and rest, and food,
All the plenitude of God.

Jesus loves and guards his own;
Me in verdant pastures feeds,
Makes me quietly lie down,
By the streams of comfort leads:
Following him where'er he goes,
Silent joy my heart o'erflows.

He in sickness makes me whole,
Guides into the paths of peace;
He revives my fainting soul,
Stablishes in righteousness;
Who for me vouchsafed to die,
Loves me still - I know not why!

Love divine shall still embrace,
Love shall keep me to the end;
Surely all my happy days
I shall in thy temple spend,
Till I to thy house remove,
Thy eternal house above!
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_the_lord_laid_his_glory_aside.php

                                        Jesus the Lord laid His glory aside,
                                        Sinners to save and make whole,
                                        Freely He died our transgressions to 
                                        hide,
                                        What is He worth to your soul?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_the_name_high_over_all.php

          Jesus! the Name high over all,
          In hell or earth or sky;
          Angels and men before it fall,
          And devils fear and fly.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_the_son_of_god.php

              Do you know Jesus,
              Our Lord, our Savior,
              Jesus the Son of God?
              Have you ever seen Him,
              Or shared of His favor?
              Jesus the Son of God.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_the_very_thought_is_sweet.php
Jesus! the very thought is sweet;
in that dear name all heart-joys meet;
but O, than honey sweeter far
the glimpses of his presence are.

No word is sung more sweet than this,
no sound is heard more full of bliss,
no thought brings sweeter comfort nigh,
than Jesus, Son of God most high.

Jesus, the hope of souls forlorn,
how good to them for sin that mourn!
To them that seek the, O how kind!
But what art thou to them that find?

No tongue of mortal can express,
no pen can write, the blessedness:
he only who hath proved it knows
what bliss from love of Jesus flows.

O Jesus, King of wondrous might!
O Victor, glorious from the fight!
Sweetness that may not be expressed,
and altogether loveliest!

Abide with us, O Lord, today,
fulfill us with thy grace, we pray;
and with thine own true sweetness feed
our souls from sin and darkness freed.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_the_virgins_crown.php
Jesus, the virgins' crown, do thou
accept us as in prayer we bow;
born of that Virgin whom alone
the Mother and the Maid we own.

Amongst the lilies thou dost feed,
with virgin choirs accompanied--
with glory decked, the spotless brides
whose bridal gifts thy love provides.

They, wheresoe'er thy footsteps bend,
with hymns and prayers still attend;
in blessèd troops they follow thee,
with dance, and song, and melody.

We pray thee therefore to bestow
upon our senses here below
thy grace, that so we may endure
from taint of all corruption pure.

All laud to God the Father be,
all praise, eternal Son, to thee;
all glory, as is ever meet,
to God the holy Paraclete.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_the_water_of_life_will_give.php

                                          Jesus the water of life will give,
                                          Freely, freely, freely;
                                          Jesus the water of life will give,
                                          Freely to those who love Him.
                                          Come to that fountain, oh drink, and 
                                          live!
                                          Freely, freely, freely;
                                          Come to that fountain, oh, drink and 
                                          live!
                                          Flowing for those that love Him.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_thou_hast_willed_it.php
Jesus, thou hast willed it,
that thy Church should be
one in faith and spirit,
ever one in thee.
We the cross are bearing,
once on Jesus laid;
we the prayer are praying
that our Master prayed.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_thy_far_extended_fame.php
Jesus, thy far-extended fame
My drooping soul exults to hear;
Thy name, thy all-restoring name,
Is music in a sinner's ear.

Sinners of old thou didst receive
With comfortable words and kind,
Their sorrows cheer, their wants relieve,
Heal the diseased, and cure the blind.

And art thou not the Saviour still,
In every place and age the same?
Hast thou forgot thy gracious skill,
Or lost the virtue of thy name?

Faith in thy changeless name I have;
The good, the kind physician, thou
Art able now our souls to save,
Art willing to restore them now.

Wouldst thou the body's health restore,
And not regard the sin-sick soul?
The soul thou lovest yet the more,
And surely thou shalt make it whole.

My soul's disease, my every sin,
To thee, O Jesus, I confess;
In pardon, Lord, my cure begin,
And perfect it in holiness.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_thy_mercies_are_untold.php
Jesus, thy mercies are untold
through each returning day;
thy love exceeds a thousandfold
whatever we can say;

that love which in thy passion drained
for us thy precious Blood;
that love whereby the saints have gained
the vision of their God;

'tis thou hast loved us from the womb,
pure source of all our bliss,
our only hope of life to come,
our happiness in this;

Lord, grant us, while on earth we stay,
thy love to feel and know;
and, when from hence we pass away,
to us thy glory show.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_thy_wandering_sheep_behold.php
Jesus, thy wandering sheep behold!
See, Lord, with tenderest pity see
The sheep that cannot find the fold,
Till sought and gathered in by thee.

Lost are they now, and scattered wide,
In pain, and weariness, and want;
With no kind shepherd near to guide
The sick, and spiritless, and faint.

Thou, only thou, the kind and good
And sheep-redeeming Shepherd art:
Collect thy flock, and give them food,
And pastors after thine own heart.

Give the pure word of general grace,
And great shall be the preachers' crowd;
Preachers, who all the sinful race
Point to the all-atoning blood.

Open their mouth, and utterance give;
Give them a trumpet-voice, to call
On all the world to turn and live,
Through faith in him who died for all.

Thy only glory let them seek;
O let their hearts with love o'erflow!
Let them believe, and therefore speak,
And spread thy mercy's praise below.

Mercy for all be all their song,
Mercy which every soul may claim,
Mercy which doth to all belong,
Mercy for all in Jesu's name.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_to_thy_table_led.php
Jesus, to thy table led,
now let every heart be fed
with the true and living Bread.

While in penitence we kneel
thy sweet presence let us feel,
all thy wondrous love reveal.

When we taste the mystic wine,
of thine outpoured Blood the sign,
fill our hearts with love divine.

Draw us to thy wounded side,
whence there flowed the healing tide;
there our sins and sorrows hide.

From the bonds of sin release,
cold and wavering faith increase,
Lamb of God, grant us thy peace.

Lead us by thy piercèd hand
till around thy throne we stand
in the bright and better land.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_touch_my_heart.php

      Jesus touch my heart
      Heal and make me whole again
      Jesus touch my heart
      Help me see my goal again
      My impurities bring me to my knees
      Jesus always sees my needs
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_understands.php

                                                Bowed beneath your burden, is 
                                                there none to share?
                                                Weary with the journey, is there 
                                                none to care?
                                                Courage, wayworn traveler, heed 
                                                your Lord’s
                                                https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_waits_to_welcome_you.php

                                            Jesus waits to welcome you,
                                            Will you come? Will you come?
                                            Arms of love outstretched to you,
                                            Will you come? Will you come?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_was_a_child_like_me.php

        Once Jesus was a child like me,
        But O, so kind and true;
        His ever watchful eye can see
        The very things I do.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_we_follow_thee.php
Jesus, we follow thee,
In all thy footsteps tread,
And seek for full conformity
To our exalted Head.

We would, we would partake
Thy every state below,
And suffer all things for thy sake,
And to thy glory go.

We in thy birth are born,
Sustain thy grief and loss,
Share in thy want, and shame, and scorn,
And die upon thy cross.

Baptised into thy death,
We sink into thy grave,
Till thou the quickening Spirit breathe,
And to the utmost save.

Thou saidst, 'Where'er I am,
There shall my servants be.'
Master, thy welcome word we claim,
And die to live with thee.

To us who share thy pain,
Thy joy shall soon be given,
And we shall in thy glory reign,
For thou art now in heaven.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_we_just_want_to_thank_you.php

          Jesus, we just want to thank You,
          Jesus, we just want to thank You,
          Jesus, we just want to thank You,
          Thank You for being so good.


          VERSE 2:
          Jesus, we just want to praise You,
          Jesus, we just want to praise You,
          Jesus, we just want to praise You,
          Praise You for being so good.


          VERSE 3:
          Savior, we just want to serve You,
          Savior, we just want to serve You,
          Savior, we just want to serve You,
          Serve You for being so good.


          VERSE 4:
          Jesus, we know You are coming,
          Jesus, we know You are coming,
          Jesus, we know You are coming,
          Take us to live in Your home.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_we_thus_obey.php
Jesus, we thus obey
thy last and kindest word;
here in thine own appointed way
we come to meet thee, Lord.

Our hearts we open wide
to make the Saviour room;
and lo, the Lamb, the Crucified,
the sinner's friend, is come.

Thy presence makes the feast;
now let our spirits feel
thy glory not to be expressed,
the joy unspeakable.

With high and heavenly bliss
thou dost our spirits cheer;
thy house of banqueting is this
and thou hast brought us here.

Now let our souls be fed
with manna from above,
and over us thy banner spread
of everlasting love.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_wept.php

                                                        Jesus wept! those tears 
                                                        are over,
                                                        But His heart is still 
                                                        the same;
                                                        Kinsman, Friend, and 
                                                        elder Brother,
                                                        Is His everlasting Name.
                                                        Savior, who can love 
                                                        like Thee,
                                                        Gracious One of Bethany?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_will_fix_it.php

      Trouble in my way (Trouble in my way)
      Have to cry sometime (I Have to cry sometime)
      Trouble in my way (Trouble in my way)
      Have to cry sometime (I Have to cry sometime)
      Lay awake at night (Lay awake at night)
      But that's all right (That's all right)
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_will_let_you_in.php

                                                                Come to the 
                                                                Father’s house,
                                                                Come ere the day 
                                                                be gone;
                                                                Tempests are 
                                                                gath’ring fast,
                                                                Darkness is 
                                                                coming on.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_will_save.php



Jesus will save, for your soul He hath given
His precious life as a ransom from sin,
That He might open an entrance to heaven,
And for you life everlasting to win.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_will_save_me.php



Hear ye the moan of a soul that is lost,
O wretched sinner, that spirit is thine;
Jesus will enter thy bosom today,
Turning thy darkness to glory divine.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_will_welcome_me_there.php

                                                                  Over the river 
                                                                  they call me,
                                                                  Friends that 
                                                                  are dear to my 
                                                                  heart;
                                                                  Soon shall I 
                                                                  meet them in 
                                                                  glory,
                                                                  Never, no 
                                                                  never to part.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_jesus_jesus.php

                  Jesus! Jesus! Jesus!
                  Sing aloud the Name;
                  Till it softly, slowly,
                  Sets all hearts aflame.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_the_name_high_over_all.php

          Jesus! the Name high over all,
          In hell or earth or sky;
          Angels and men before it fall,
          And devils fear and fly.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_dear_name_how_sweet_it_sounds.php

                                                                                                                           Jesus! dear Name, how sweet it sounds!
                                                                                                                           Replete with balm for all our wounds:
                                                                                                                           His Word declares His grace is free,
                                                                                                                           Come, needy sinner, “Come and see."https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_faithful_to_his_word.php

                                                                                                                           Jesus, faithful to His Word, shall with a shout descend;
                                                                                                                           All Heaven’s host their glorious Lord shall pompously attend:
                                                                                                                           Christ shall come with dreadful noise, lightnings swift, and thunders loud;
                                                                                                                           With the great archangel’s voice, and with the trump of God.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_friend_of_sinners.php

                                                                                                                               Jesus, Friend of sinners, hast Thou love for me?
                                                                                                                               Son of God the Holy, Man of mystery,
                                                                                                                               Lover of the children, Teacher of the wise,
                                                                                                                               Let me read the secret in Thy friendly eyes.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_full_of_love_divine.php

                                                                                                                                 Jesus, full of love divine,
                                                                                                                                 I am Thine and Thou art mine;
                                                                                                                                 Let me live and die to prove
                                                                                                                                 Thine unutterable love.
                                                                                                                                 More and more of love I claim,
                                                                                                                                 Glowing still with quenchless flame;
                                                                                                                                 All my heart to Thee aspires,
                                                                                                                                 Yearns with infinite desire.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_good_above_all_others.php

                                                                                                                                   Jesus, good above all other,
                                                                                                                                   Gentle Child of gentle mother,
                                                                                                                                   In a stable born our Brother,
                                                                                                                                   Give us grace to persevere.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_grant_that_balm_and_healing.php

                                                                                                                                     Jesus, grant that balm and healing
                                                                                                                                     In Thy holy wounds I find,
                                                                                                                                     Every hour that I am feeling,
                                                                                                                                     Pains of body and of mind.
                                                                                                                                     Should some evil thought within
                                                                                                                                     Tempt my treacherous heart to sin,
                                                                                                                                     Show the peril, and from sinning
                                                                                                                                     Keep me ere its first beginning.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_i_am_coming_home_today.php

              Jesus, I am coming home today, for
              I have found there’s joy in Thee alone;
              From the path of sin I turn away; now
              I am coming home.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_i_am_resting_resting.php

    Jesus, I am resting, resting,
    In the joy of what Thou art;
    I am finding out the greatness
    Of Thy loving heart.
    Thou hast bid me gaze upon Thee,
    And Thy beauty fills my soul,
    For by Thy transforming power,
    Thou hast made me whole.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_i_come.php

      Out of my bondage, sorrow, and night,
      Jesus, I come, Jesus, I come;
      Into Thy freedom, gladness, and light,
      Jesus, I come to Thee;
      Out of my sickness, into Thy health,
      Out of my want and into Thy wealth,
      Out of my sin and into Thyself,
      Jesus, I come to Thee.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_i_love_thy_charming_name.php

    Jesus, I love Thy charming Name,
    ’Tis music to mine ear;
    Fain would I sound it out so loud
    That earth and Heaven should hear.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_i_my_cross_have_taken.php

      Jesus, I my cross have taken, all to leave and follow Thee.
      Destitute, despised, forsaken, Thou from hence my all shall be.
      Perish every fond ambition, all I’ve sought or hoped or known.
      Yet how rich is my condition! God and heaven are still mine own.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_i_will_ponder_now.php

      Jesus, I will ponder now
      On Your holy Passion;
      Let Your Spirit now endow
      Me for meditation.
      Grant that I in love and faith
      May the image cherish
      Of Your suffering, pain and death
      That I may not perish.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_i_will_trust_thee.php

        Jesus, I will trust Thee, trust Thee with my soul;
        Guilty, lost, and helpless, Thou canst make me whole.
        There is none in Heaven or on earth like Thee:
        Thou hast died for sinners—therefore Lord for me.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_ill_go_through_with_thee.php

          I have made my choice forever; I will walk with Christ my Lord.
          Naught from Him my soul can sever while I知 trusting in His Word.
          I the lonely ways have taken, rough and toilsome though it be;
          And although despised, forsaken, Jesus I値l go through with Thee.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_immortal_king.php

            Jesus, immortal King, arise!
            Assume, assert Thy sway,
            Till earth, subdued, its tribute brings,
            And distant lands obey.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_in_sickness_and_in_pain.php

              Jesus, in sickness and in pain,
              Be near to succor me,
              My sinking spirit still sustain;
              To Thee I turn, to Thee.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_in_thee_our_eyes_behold.php

                Jesus, in Thee our eyes behold
                A thousand glories more,
                Than the rich gems and polished gold
                The sons of Aaron wore.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_in_thy_dying_woes.php

                Jesus, in Thy dying woes,
                Even while Thy lifeblood floes,
                Craving pardon for Thy foes;
                Hear us, holy Jesus.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_invites_his_saints.php

                  Jesus invites His saints
                  To meet around His board;
                  Here pardoned rebels sit and hold
                  Communion with their Lord.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_jesus_only.php

                  Freedom gain from sin’s control?
                  Jesus can redeem your soul—
                  Jesus, Jesus only.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_jesus_only_jesus.php

                    Jesus, Jesus, only Jesus,
                    Can my heartfelt longing still.
                    Lo, I pledge myself to Jesus
                    What He wills alone to will.
                    For my heart, which He hath filled,
                    Ever cries, Lord, as Thou wilt.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_keep_me_near_the_cross.php

                        Jesus, keep me near the cross,
                        There a precious fountain
                        Free to all, a healing stream
                        Flows from Calvary’s mountain.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_king_of_glory.php

                      Jesus, King of glory, throned above the sky,
                      Jesus, tender Savior, hear Thy children cry.
                      Pardon our transgressions, cleanse from our sin,
                      By Thy Spirit help us heav’nly life to win.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_lead_me_up_the_mountain.php

                          Jesus, lead me up the mountain,
                          Where the whitest robes are seen,
                          Where the saints can see the fountain,
                          Where the pure are keeping clean.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_lord_and_precious_savior.php

                                Jesus, Lord and precious Savior,
                                All my comfort and my joy!
                                Graciously extend Thy favor,
                                Let Thy Word my soul employ.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_lord_of_our_salvation.php

                                  Jesu, Lord of our salvation,
                                  For Thy warrior, bold and true,
                                  Now accept our thankful praises,
                                  And our strength do Thou renew,
                                  That, like George, with courage dauntless
                                  We may all our foes subdue.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_lord_we_look_to_thee.php

                                    Jesus, Lord, we look to Thee;
                                    Let us in Thy Name agree;
                                    Show Thyself the Prince of Peace,
                                    Bid our strife forever cease.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_lover_of_my_soul.php

            Jesus, lover of my soul, let me to Thy bosom fly,
            While the nearer waters roll, while the tempest still is high.
            Hide me, O my Savior, hide, till the storm of life is past;
            Safe into the haven guide; O receive my soul at last.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_master_whose_i_am.php

                                              Jesus, Master, Whose I am,
                                              Purchased Thine alone to be,
                                              By Thy blood, O spotless Lamb,
                                              Shed so willingly for me,
                                              Let my heart be all Thine own,
                                              Let me live for Thee alone.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_meek_and_gentle.php

                                                Jesus, meek and gentle,
                                                Son of God most high,
                                                Gracious, loving Savior,
                                                Hear Thy children’s cry.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_meek_and_lowly.php
Jesus, meek and lowly, 
Savior, pure and holy,
on thy love relying
hear me humbly crying.

Prince of life and power,
my salvation's tower,
on the cross I view thee
calling sinners to thee.

There behold me gazing
at the sight amazing;
bending low before thee,
helpless I adore thee.

By thy red wounds streaming,
with thy life-blood gleaming,
blood for sinners flowing,
pardon free bestowing;

by that fount of blessing,
thy dear love expressing,
all my aching sadness
turn thou into gladness.

Lord, in mercy guide me,
be thou e'er beside me;
in thy ways direct me,
'neath thy wings protect me.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_merciful_and_mild.php

                                                  Jesus, merciful and mild, lead 
                                                  me as a helpless child:
                                                  On no other arm but Thine 
                                                  would my weary soul recline.
                                                  Thou art ready to forgive, 
                                                  Thou canst bid the sinner 
                                                  live;
                                                  Guide the wanderer, day by 
                                                  day, in the straight and 
                                                  narrow way.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_my_advocate_above.php

                                                    Jesus, my Advocate above,
                                                    My Friend before the throne 
                                                    of love,
                                                    If now for me prevails Thy 
                                                    prayer,
                                                    If now I find Thee pleading 
                                                    there,
                                                    If Thou the secret wish 
                                                    convey,
                                                    And sweetly prompt my heart 
                                                    to pray;
                                                    Hear, and my weak petitions 
                                                    join,
                                                    Almighty Advocate, to Thine.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_my_all_in_all.php

        Jesus, my Savior, I love and adore Thee,
        Jesus my all in all;
        Nothing on earth would I worship before Thee,
        Jesus my all in all.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_my_all_to_heaven_is_gone.php

                                                          Jesus, my all, to 
                                                          Heaven is gone,
                                                          He Whom I fix my hopes 
                                                          upon;
                                                          His track I see, and 
                                                          I’ll pursue
                                                          The narrow way, till 
                                                          Him I view.
                                                          The way the holy 
                                                          prophets went,
                                                          The road that leads 
                                                          from banishment,
                                                          The King’s highway of 
                                                          holiness,
                                                          I’ll go, for all His 
                                                          paths are peace.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_my_friend.php

                                                          I have a Friend so 
                                                          dear,
                                                          Constant and true is 
                                                          He,
                                                          Filling my heart with 
                                                          cheer,
                                                          So good to me.
                                                          He’s covered ev’ry sin 
                                                          and stain,
                                                          His pow’r now makes me 
                                                          whole again,
                                                          And soon with Him 
                                                          fore’er I’ll reign—
                                                          Jesus, my Friend.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_my_king_my_wonderful_savior.php

                            Jesus, my King, my wonderful Savior,
                            All of my life is given to Thee.
                            I am rejoicing in Thy salvation;
                            Thy precious blood now maketh me free.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_my_lord_my_god_my_all.php

                                                            Jesus, my Lord, my 
                                                            God, my All,
                                                            Hear me, blest 
                                                            Savior, when I call;
                                                            Hear me, and from 
                                                            Thy dwelling place
                                                            Pour down the riches 
                                                            of Thy grace;
                                                            Jesus, my Lord, I 
                                                            Thee adore;
                                                            O make me love Thee 
                                                            more and more.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_my_lord_to_thee_i_cry.php

                              Jesus, my Lord, to Thee I cry;
                              Unless Thou help me I must die;
                              Oh, bring Thy free salvation nigh,
                              And take me as I am.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_my_only_hope.php

                                                              Jesus, my only 
                                                              Hope, Friend ever 
                                                              dear,
                                                              Bend to my earnest 
                                                              prayer Thy 
                                                              gracious ear;
                                                              Come from Thy 
                                                              throne above, come 
                                                              and my dross 
                                                              remove,
                                                              Fill me with 
                                                              perfect love, 
                                                              Savior, to Thee.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_my_savior_is_precious_to_me.php

                                Jesus, my Savior, is precious to me,
                                He careth for me;
                                Loving and keeping me happy and free,
                                He careth for me.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_my_savior_let_me_be.php

                                                                Jesus, my 
                                                                Savior, let me 
                                                                be
                                                                More perfectly 
                                                                conformed to 
                                                                Thee;
                                                                Implant each 
                                                                grace, each sin 
                                                                dethrone,
                                                                And form my 
                                                                temper like 
                                                                Thine own.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_my_savior_look_on_me.php

                                                                      Jesus, my 
                                                                      Savior, 
                                                                      look on 
                                                                      me,
                                                                      For I am 
                                                                      weary and 
                                                                      oppressed;
                                                                      I come to 
                                                                      cast 
                                                                      myself on 
                                                                      Thee:
                                                                      Thou art 
                                                                      my Rest.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_my_savior_to_bethlehem_came.php

                                  Jesus, my Savior, to Bethlehem came,
                                  Laid in a manger to sorrow and shame;
                                  Oh, it was wonderful, blest be His Name,
                                  Seeking for me, for me:
                                  Seeking for me, seeking for me,
                                  Seeking for me, seeking for me,
                                  Oh, it was wonderful, blest be His Name,
                                  Seeking for me, for me.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_my_strength.php

                                                                    Jesus, my 
                                                                    Strength, my 
                                                                    Hope,
                                                                    On Thee I 
                                                                    cast my 
                                                                    care,
                                                                    With humble 
                                                                    confidence 
                                                                    look up,
                                                                    And know 
                                                                    Thou hear’st 
                                                                    my prayer.
                                                                    Give me on 
                                                                    Thee to wait
                                                                    Till I can 
                                                                    all things 
                                                                    do;
                                                                    On Thee, 
                                                                    almighty to 
                                                                    create,
                                                                    Almighty to 
                                                                    renew.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_my_truth_my_way.php

                                    My Lord, my Truth, my Way,
                                    [https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_name_of_wondrous_love.php

                                                                        Jesus! 
                                                                        Name of 
                                                                        wondrous 
                                                                        love!
                                                                        Name all 
                                                                        other 
                                                                        names 
                                                                        above!
                                                                        Unto 
                                                                        which 
                                                                        must 
                                                                        every 
                                                                        knee
                                                                        Bow in 
                                                                        deep 
                                                                        humility.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_name_all_names_above.php
Jesus, Name all names above,
Jesus, best and dearest;
Jesus, Fount of perfect love,
holiest, tenderest, nearest:
Jesus, Source of grace completest;
Jesus purest, Jesus sweetest;
Jesus, Well of power divine,
make me, keep me, seal me thine!

Woe that I have turned aside
after fleshly pleasure!
Woe that I have never tried
for the heavenly treasure!
Treasure, safe in homes supernal,
incorruptible, eternal;
treasure no less price hath won
than the passion of the Son!

Jesus, crowned with thorns for me,
scourged for my transgression!
Witnessing, through agony,
that thy good confession!
Jesus, clad in purple raiment,
for my evils making payment:
let not all thy woe and pain,
let not Calvary be in vain!

Jesus, open me the gate
that of old he entered
who, in that most low estate,
wholly on thee ventured;
thou, whose wounds are ever pleading
and thy passion interceding,
from my misery let me rise
to a home in paradise!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_on_the_mountain_peak.php
Jesus, on the mountain peak,
stands alone in glory blazing;
let us, if we dare to speak,
with the saints and angels praise him.
Alleluia!

Trembling at his feet we saw
Moses and Elijah speaking.
All the prophets and the Law
shout through them their joyful greeting.
Alleluia!

Swift the cloud of glory came.
God proclaiming in its thunder
Jesus as the Son by name!
Nations, cry aloud in wonder!
Alleluia!

Jesus is the chosen One,
living hope of every nation.
Hear and heed him, everyone;
sing with earth and all creation:
Alleluia!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_our_brother.php

                                      Jesus, our Brother, strong and good,
                                      Was humbly born in a stable rude,
                                      And the friendly beasts around Him stood,
                                      Jesus, our Brother, strong and good.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_our_hope.php
Jesus, our hope, our heart's desire,
thy work of grace we sing;
Redeemer of the world art thou,
its Maker and its King.

How vast the mercy and the love
which laid our sins on thee,
and led thee to a cruel death,
to set thy people free!

But now the bonds of death are burst;
the ransom has been paid;
and thou art on thy Father's throne,
in glorious robes arrayed.

O may thy mighty love prevail
our sinful souls to spare!
O may we stand around thy throne,
and see thy glory there!

Jesus, our only joy be thou,
as thou our prize wilt be;
in thee be all our glory now
and through eternity.

All praise to thee who art gone up
triumphantly to heaven;
all praise to God the Father's Name
and Holy Ghost be given.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_priceless_treasure.php

    Jesus, priceless Treasure,
    Source of purest pleasure,
    Truest Friend to me.
    Ah, how long in anguish
    Shall my spirit languish,
    Yearning, Lord, for Thee?
    Thou art mine, O Lamb divine!
    I will suffer naught to hide Thee,
    Naught I ask beside Thee.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_refuge_of_the_weary.php

      Jesus, Refuge of the weary,
      Object of the spirit’s love,
      Fountain in life’s desert dreary,
      Savior from the world above.
      O how oft Thine eyes, offended,
      Gaze upon the sinner’s fall;
      Yet upon the cross extended,
      Thou didst bear the pain of all.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_rose_of_sharon.php

  Jesus, Rose of Sharon, bloom within my heart;
  Beauties of Thy truth and holiness impart,
  That where’er I go my life may shed abroad
  Fragrance of the knowledge of the love of God.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_savior_come_to_me.php

        Jesus, Savior, come to me;
        Let me ever be with Thee;
        Come and nevermore depart,
        Thou Who reignest in my heart.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_savior_pilot_me.php

          Jesus, Savior, pilot me
          Over life’s tempestuous sea;
          Unknown waves before me roll,
          Hiding rock and treacherous shoal.
          Chart and compass come from Thee;
          Jesus, Savior, pilot me.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_savior_we_implore_thee.php

            Jesus, Savior, we implore Thee,
            Hear Thy children now before Thee,
            For Thy goodness we adore Thee,
            Still our hearts in safety keep.
            While Thy mercy we are pleading,
            Thou in Heav’n art interceding;
            Lead us where Thy flocks are feeding,
            Gentle Shepherd, lead Thy sheep.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_son_of_god_most_high.php
Jesus, Son of God most high,
who didst in a manger lie,
who upon the cross didst die:
hear us, holy Jesus.

Jesus, once an infant small, 
cradled in the oxen's stall,
though the God and Lord of all:
hear us, holy Jesus.

Be thou with us every day,
in our work and in our play,
when we learn and when we pray:
hear us, holy Jesus.

When we lie asleep at night,
ever may thy angels bright
keep us safe till morning light:
hear us, holy Jesus.

Make us brave without a fear,
make us happy, full of cheer,
sure that thou art always near:
hear us, holy Jesus.

May we prize our Christian name,
may we guard it free from blame,
hating all that causes shame:
hear us, holy Jesus.

May we grow from day to day,
glad to learn each holy way,
ever ready to obey:
hear us, holy Jesus.

May we ever try to be
from all angry tempers free,
pure and gentle, Lord, like thee:
hear us, holy Jesus.

May our thoughts be undefiled,
may our words be true and mild,
make us each a holy child:
hear us, holy Jesus.

Jesus, from thy heavenly throne,
watching o'er each little one,
till our life on earth in done:
hear us, holy Jesus.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_stand_among_us.php
Jesus, stand among us 
              at the meeting of our lives,
              Be our sweet agreement at the meeting of our eyes;
              O, Jesus, we love You, so we gather here,
              Join our hearts in unity and take away our fear.

              So to You we're gathering out of each and every land,
              Christ the love between us at the joining of our hands;
              O, Jesus, we love You, so we gather here,
              Join our hearts in unity and take away our fear.

              Lead us, heavenly father
              Lead us, heavenly Father, lead us
              O'er the world's tempestuous sea;
              Guard us, guide us, keep us, feed us,
              For we have no help but thee;
              Yet possessing every blessing,
              If our God our Father be.

              Saviour, breathe forgiveness o'er us:
              All our weakness thou dost know;
              Thou didst tread this earth before us,
              Thou didst feel its keenest woe;
              Lone and dreary, faint and weary,
              Through the desert thou didst go.

              Spirit of our God, descending,
              Fill our hearts with heavenly joy,
              Love with every passion blending,
              Pleasure that can never cloy:
              Thus provided, pardoned, guided,
              Nothing can our peace destroy.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_still_lead_on.php

  Jesus, still lead on, till our rest be won,
  And, although the way be cheerless,
  We will follow calm and fearless,
  Guide us by Thy hand to our fatherland.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_son_of_righteousness.php
Jesus, Sun of righteousness,
brightest beam of love divine,
with the early morning rays
do thou on our darkness shine,
and dispel with purest light
all our night.

As on drooping herb and flower
falls the soft refreshing dew,
let thy Spirit's grace and power
all our weary souls renew;
showers of blessing over all
softly fall.

Like the sun's reviving ray,
may thy love with tender glow
all our coldness melt away,
warm and cheer us forth to go,
gladly serve thee and obey
all the day.

O our only Hope and Guide,
never leave us nor forsake;
keep us ever at thy side
till the eternal morning break;
moving on to Zion's hill,
homeward still.

Lead us all our days and years
in thy straight and narrow way;
lead us through the vale of tears
to the land of perfect day,
where thy people, fully blest,
safely rest.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_the_all-restoring_word.php

      Jesus, the all-restoring Word,
      My fallen spirit’s hope,
      After Thy lovely likeness, Lord,
      Ah! when shall I wake up?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_the_calm_that_fills_my_breast.php

        Jesus, the calm that fills my breast,
        No other heart than Thine can give;
        This peace unstirred, this joy of rest,
        None but Thy loved ones can receive.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_the_conqueror_reigns.php

          Jesus, the Conqueror, reigns,
          In glorious strength arrayed,
          His kingdom over all maintains,
          And bids the earth be glad.
          Ye sons of men, rejoice
          In Jesus’ mighty love,
          Lift up your heart, lift up your voice
          To Him who rules above.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_the_rising_lord_of_all.php

          Jesus, the rising Lord of all,
          His love to man commends,
          Poor worms He blushes not to call
          His brethren and His friends.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_the_sinners_freind.php

            Jesus, the sinner’s Friend, to Thee,
            Lost and undone, for aid I flee,
            Weary of earth, myself, and sin:
            Open Thine arms, and take me in.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_the_truth_and_power_divine.php

                Jesus, the Truth and Power divine,
                Send forth these messengers of Thine;
                Their hands confirm, their hearts inspire,
                And touch their lips with hallowed fire.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_the_very_thought_of_thee.php

                  Jesus, the very thought of Thee
                  With sweetness fills the breast;
                  But sweeter far Thy face to see,
                  And in Thy presence rest.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_these_eyes_have_never_seen.php

                    Jesus, these eyes have never seen,
                    That radiant form of Thine;
                    The veil of sense hangs dark between
                    Thy blessèd face and mine.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_thine_all_victorious_love.php

                      Jesus, Thine all victorious love
                      Shed in my heart abroad;
                      Then shall my feet no longer rove,
                      Rooted and fixed in God.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_thou_art_mine_forever.php

                        Jesus, Thou art mine forever,
                        Dearer far than earth to me;
                        Neither life nor death shall sever
                        Those sweet ties which bind to Thee.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_thou_art_the_sinners_friend.php

                          Jesus, Thou art the sinner’s Friend;
                          As such I look to Thee;
                          Now, in the fullness of Thy love,
                          O Lord, remember me.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_thou_divine_companion.php

                            Jesus, Thou divine Companion,
                            By Thy lowly human birth
                            Thou hast come to join the workers,
                            Burden bearers of the earth.
                            Thou, the Carpenter of Nazareth,
                            Toiling for Thy daily food,
                            By Thy patience and Thy courage,
                            Thou hast taught us toil is good.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_thou_everlasting_king.php

                              Jesus, Thou everlasting King,
                              Accept the tribute which we bring;
                              Accept the well deserved renown,
                              And wear our praises as Thy crown.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_thou_joy_of_loving_hearts.php

                                Jesus, Thou Joy of loving hearts,
                                Thou Fount of life, Thou Light of men,
                                From the best bliss that earth imparts,
                                We turn unfilled to Thee again.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_thou_soul_of_all_our_joys.php

                                  Jesus, Thou soul of all our joys,
                                  For Whom we now lift up our voice,
                                  And all our strength exert;
                                  Vouchsafe the grace we humbly claim,
                                  Compose into a thankful frame,
                                  And tune Thy people’s heart.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_thy_blood_and_righteousness.php

                                    Jesus, Thy blood and righteousness
                                    My beauty are, my glorious dress;
                                    ’Midst flaming worlds, in these arrayed,
                                    With joy shall I lift up my head.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_thy_blood_and_thy_name.php



Jesus, Thy blood, Thy precious blood!
For sin it doth atone,
Because Thou art the Lamb of God,
It speaks before the throne.
Thy blood shall have its praises sung
By yonder white-robed throng;
All hail then to this precious blood,
I’ll shout in ceaseless song.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_thy_boundless_love_to_me.php

                                      Jesus, Thy boundless love to me
                                      No thought can reach, no tongue declare;
                                      Unite my thankful heart with Thee
                                      And reign without a rival there.
                                      To Thee alone, dear Lord, I live;
                                      Myself to Thee, dear Lord, I give.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_thy_name_hath_powr_to_bless.php

                                          Jesus, Thy Name hath pow’r to bless
                                          Our troubled souls in all distress.
                                          On us, dear Lord, bestow Thy grace,
                                          And guide us safely all our days.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_thy_name_i_love.php

                                            Jesus, Thy Name I love
                                            All other names above,
                                            Jesus, my Lord:
                                            O Thou art all to me;
                                            Nothing to please I see,
                                            Nothing apart from Thee,
                                            Jesus, my Lord.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_thy_table_led.php

                                              Jesus, to Thy table led,
                                              Now let every heart be fed
                                              With the true and living Bread.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_thy_church_with_loving_eyes.php

                                        Jesus, Thy church with longing eyes
                                        For Thine expected coming waits:
                                        When will the promised Light arise,
                                        And glory beam from Zion’s gates?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_united_by_thy_grace.php

                                                  Jesus, united by Thy grace,
                                                  And each to each endeared,
                                                  With confidence we seek Thy 
                                                  face
                                                  And know our prayer is heard.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_we_look_to_thee.php

                                                      Jesus, we look to Thee,
                                                      Thy promised presence 
                                                      claim;
                                                      Thou in the midst of us 
                                                      shall be,
                                                      Assembled in Thy Name.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_what_a_friend_for_sinners.php

                                                        Jesus! what a Friend for 
                                                        sinners!
                                                        Jesus! Lover of my soul;
                                                        Friends may fail me, 
                                                        foes assail me,
                                                        He, my Savior, makes me 
                                                        whole.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_whereer_thy_people_meet.php

                                                          Jesus, where’er Thy 
                                                          people meet,
                                                          There they behold Thy 
                                                          mercy seat;
                                                          Where’er they seek 
                                                          Thee Thou art found,
                                                          And every place is 
                                                          hallowed ground.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_while_our_hearts_are_bleeding.php

                                                            Jesus, while our 
                                                            hearts are bleeding
                                                            O’er the spoils that 
                                                            death has won,
                                                            We would at this 
                                                            solemn meeting
                                                            Calmly say, “Thy 
                                                            will be done."https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_who_bought_us_with_his_blood.php

                                                            Jesus, Who bought us 
                                                            with His blood,
                                                            And makes our souls 
                                                            His care;
                                                            Was known of old as 
                                                            Israel’s God,
                                                            And answered Jabez’ 
                                                            prayer.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_whose_blood_so_freely_streamed.php

                                                              Jesus, Whose blood 
                                                              so freely streamed
                                                              To satisfy the 
                                                              law’s demand;
                                                              By Thee from guilt 
                                                              and wrath 
                                                              redeemed,
                                                              Before the 
                                                              Father’s face I 
                                                              stand.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_with_thy_church_abide.php

  Jesus, with Thy Church abide,
  Be her Savior, Lord, and Guide,
  While on earth her faith is tried:
  We beseech Thee, hear us.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_wonderful_name.php

    Oh, wonderful name, how my heart thrills to hear it—
    The name of my risen Redeemer and King!
    It falls like the music of Heav’n on my spirit,
    And fills me with rapture divine while I sing.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_wondrous_savior.php

      Jesus, wondrous Savior! Christ, of kings the King!
      Angels fall before Thee, prostrate worshipping;
      Fairest they confess Thee in the Heav’n above.
      We would sing Thee fairest here in hymns of love.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_keep_me_every_day.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jewels.php



When He cometh, when He cometh,
To make up His jewels,
All His jewels, precious jewels,
His loved and His own.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jimmie_said_his_kind_protector.php

                                              Jimmie, said his kind protector,
                                              Long his faithful friend and 
                                              guide,
                                              Jimmie, do you love the Savior?
                                              Yes, the happy child replied.
                                              Can you tell how much you love 
                                              Him?
                                              All my heart to Him I give;
                                              Love my Savior? Yes, forever,
                                              I will try for Him to live.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/john_in_vision_saw_the_day.php

        John in vision saw the day
        When the Judge will hasten down;
        Heav’n and earth shall flee away
        From the terror of His frown:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/john_saw_the_heavn_and_earth_made_new.php

          John saw the Heav’n and earth made new,
          The first had passed away,
          The holy city coming down,
          The new Jerusalem.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/john_the_relevator.php

      Upon the Isle of Patmus
      One man was cast one day
      As he was left alone to die
      He began to pray
      The Holy Ghost fell on him
      The Spirit, he came down
      Well he began to write about the things he saw
      The Revelator's name was Johnhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/john_wrote_the_churches.php

      Chorus:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/join_all_the_glorious_names.php

            Join all the glorious names
            Of wisdom, love, and power,
            That ever mortals knew,
            That angels ever bore:
            All are too mean to speak His worth,
            To poor to set my Savior forth.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/join_all_ye_joyful_nations.php

              Join all ye joyful nations
              The acclaiming hosts of Heav’n!
              This happy morn a Child is born
              To us a Son is given.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/join_every_tongue_to_sing.php



Join, every tongue, to sing
The mercies of the Lord;
The love of Christ, our King,
Let every heart record.
He saved us from the wrath of God,
And paid our ransom with His blood.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jonah.php

                  God spoke to Jonah and gave him command:
                  “Go east to Nineveh and tell them My plan."
                  Jonah objected and fled from the Lord;
                  Soon found a ship headed west, went on board.
                  Then God sent forth a tempest; upon the ship it beat.
                  Each man cried to his own god, but Jonah fell asleep.
                  The sailors came and woke him, his business did demand.
                  He said, “My God’s the Lord of Heav’n, who made the sea and 
                  land."https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jonah_and_the_whale.php

                    In the Bible we are told
                    Of a prophet who was called
                    To a city that was steeped in awful sin;
                    All the people in that place
                    Were devoid of saving grace,
                    And the prophet seemed afraid to enter in.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joshua_fit_the_battle_of_jericho.php

      Chorus:
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joshua_fit_the_battle_of_jericho2.php

      Tum, tum, tumblin' down
      Tum, tum, tumblin' down
      Tum, tum, tumblin' down
      Tum, tum, tumblin' down (I said tum, they come tumblin' down)
      Tum, tum, tumblin' down (They come tumblin' down)
      Tum, tum, tumblin' down (Way down to the ground)
      Tum, tum, tumblin' down
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joy_among_the_angles.php



There is joy, glad joy among the angels,
Joy in heav’n above,
When a soul returns from sin and folly
To the Savior’s love.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joy_and_light.php

        Joy and light, joy and light,
        Over the crystal sea;
        Come, come, soft and bright,
        Over the crystal sea.
        Come on your snowy pinions white,
        Come in the silent calm of night,
        Watch when the pale stars keep,
        Bring the troubled one,
        Bring the weary one sleep.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joy_and_light.php

        Joy and light, joy and light,
        Over the crystal sea;
        Come, come, soft and bright,
        Over the crystal sea.
        Come on your snowy pinions white,
        Come in the silent calm of night,
        Watch when the pale stars keep,
        Bring the troubled one,
        Bring the weary one sleep.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joy_and_triumph_everlasting.php

    Joy and triumph everlasting
    Hath the heav’nly Church on high;
    For that pure immortal gladness
    All our feast days mourn and sigh:
    Yet in death’s dark desert wild
    Doth the mother aid her child;
    Guards celestial thence attend us,
    Stand in combat to defend us.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joy_because_the_circling_year.php

      Joy! because the circling year
      Brings our day of blessings here;
      Day when first the light divine
      On the Church began to shine.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joy_bells_are_ringing.php

        Joy bells are ringing,
        Christmas is bringing
        Tidings of Jesus’ birth.
        Candles are gleaming,
        Gladness is streaming
        Out over all the earth.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joy_by_and_by.php

          O there’ll be joy when the work is done,
          Joy when the reapers gather home,
          Bringing the sheaves at set of sun
          To the New Jerusalem.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joy_dawned_again_on_easter_day.php

            Joy dawned again on Easter Day,
            The sun shone out with fairer ray,
            When, to their longing eyes restored
            Th’Apostles saw their risen Lord.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joy_dispels_our_sorrow.php

              Morning light was dawning o’er the distant hills,
              Banished was the midnight gloom;
              Silently the angels clad in bright array
              Came to guard the dear Redeemer’s tomb.
              Soldiers were affrighted and in terror fled,
              While the angels roll the stone away.
              Then with joy proclaiming, “Christ the Lord is ris’n"
              “See the place where once the Savior lay."https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joy_fills_our_inmost_hearts_today.php

                Joy fills our inmost hearts today!
                The royal Child is born:
                And angel hosts in glad array
                His advent keep this morn.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joy_in_my_heart.php

        One day I was walking in a world of sin
        No rest for my weary soul
        Then I met a man who said
        He'd be my friend
        All my burdens He did roll

        God took those worldy desires
        Gave me heavenly fire
        And now I got a brand new goal
        And since3 I met this man called
        Jesus Christ
        I got the joy joy joy in my soul

        Chorus
        I got joy in my heart
        Joy in my mind
        Joy since that happy day

        I got joy in my hands
        Joy in my feed
        I got joy in every way

        God took those worldly desires
        Gave me heavenly fire
        And now I got a brand new goal
        And since I met this man called 
        Jesus Christ
        I got the joy joy joy in my soul

        I got my eyes on Jesus 
        got my mind made up
        and I tell it everywhere I go
        Ain't nobody gonna turn me around
        'Cause Jesus is in control

        God took those worldly desires
        Gave me heavnily fire
        And now I got a brand new goal
        And since i met this man called
        Jesus Christ
        I got the joy joy joy in my soul

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joy_in_serving_jesus.php
There is joy in serving Jesus
As I journey on my way
Joy that fills my heart with praises
Every hour and every day

There is joy, joy
                Joy in serving Jesus               
Joy that throbs within my heart
Every moment, every hour
As I draw upon His power
There is joy, joy
Joy that never shall depart

There is joy in serving Jesus
Joy; that triumphs over pain
Fills my heart with heaven's music
Till I join the glad refrain

There is joy, joy
                Joy in serving Jesus               
Joy that throbs within my heart
Every moment, every hour
As I draw upon His power
There is joy, joy
Joy that never shall depart

There is joy in serving Jesus
As I walk alone with God
'Tis the joy of Christ my Saviour
Who the path of suffering trod

There is joy, joy
               Joy in serving Jesus               
Joy that throbs within my heart
Every moment, every hour
As I draw upon His power
There is joy, joy
Joy that never shall depart

There is joy in serving Jesus
Joy amid the darkest night
For I've learned the wondrous secret
And I'm walking in the light

There is joy, joy
                Joy in serving Jesus               
Joy that throbs within my heart
Every moment, every hour
As I draw upon His power
There is joy, joy
Joy that never shall departhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joy_in_sorrow.php

                  I’ve found a joy in sorrow, a secret balm for pain,
                  A beautiful tomorrow of sunshine after rain;
                  I’ve found a branch of healing near every bitter spring;
                  A whispered promise stealing o’er every broken string,
                  A whispered promise stealing o’er every broken string.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joy_in_the_morning.php

      Lord
      Sometimes it seems my enemies are laughing at me
      So many trials in my way that I can't seehttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joy_in_the_service.php



There is joy in the service of the Master,
Let me sing of the glory I have found;
Since I gave all to Jesus, and His favor gained,
Oh, wondrous streams of joy forever abound.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joy_is_a_fruit_that_will_not_grow.php

                    Joy is a fruit that will not grow
                    In nature’s barren soil;
                    All we can boast, till Christ we know,
                    Is vanity and toil.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joy_joy.php
I have a joy, joy, joy, joy down in my 
heart
Down in my heart, down in my heart
I have a joy, joy, joy, joy down in my heart
Down in my heart todayhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joy_joy_immortal_joy.php

        Joy, joy, immortal joy!
        The Lord is ris’n to reign;
        On Easter day, the Scriptures say,
        Christ rose to life again.
        On Easter day, the Scriptures say,
        Christ rose to life again.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joy_of_the_lord.php

      The joy of the Lord will be my strength
      I will not falter, I will not faint
      He is my Shepherd, I am not afraid
      The joy of the Lord is my strengthhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joy_of_thy_salvation.php

      Chorus 1:
      We need the joy of Thy salvation
      It is a strong and mighty shield (mighty shield)
      Give us the joy of Thy salvation
      So Thy power may be revealed
      (Repeat)https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joy_to_the_world.php



Joy to the world, the Lord is come!
Let earth receive her King;
Let every heart prepare Him room,
And heav地 and nature sing,
And heav地 and nature sing,
And heav地, and heav地, and nature sing.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joy_unspeakable.php



I have found His grace is all complete,
He supplieth every need;
While I sit and learn at Jesus’ feet,
I am free, yes, free indeed.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joy_joy_immortal_joy.php

        Joy, joy, immortal joy!
        The Lord is ris’n to reign;
        On Easter day, the Scriptures say,
        Christ rose to life again.
        On Easter day, the Scriptures say,
        Christ rose to life again.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joyful_joyful_we_adore_thee.php



Joyful, joyful, we adore Thee,
God of glory, Lord of love;
Hearts unfold like flow’rs before Thee,
Op’ning to the sun above.
Melt the clouds of sin and sadness;
Drive the dark of doubt away;
Giver of immortal gladness,
Fill us with the light of day!
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joyful_meeting_in_glory.php



Tell me, watchman, oh, what of the morning
Do you see as the mist clears away?
We behold in its splendor the dawning
Of a bright and glorious day.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joyful_news_to_all_mankind.php

                                                Joyful news to all mankind,
                                                Jesus is mighty to save;
                                                All who seek shall surely find
                                                Jesus is mighty to save.
                                                Sinners may relinquish wrong,
                                                Faltering hearts may now be 
                                                strong;
                                                Sound the tidings right along,
                                                Jesus is mighty, is mighty to 
                                                save.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joyful_noise.php

      Come on now, let's make a joyful noisehttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joyfully_sing.php

                                                  Sing with a tuneful song, sing 
                                                  and adore
                                                  Jesus the Holy One, King 
                                                  evermore;
                                                  He is the desert Rock, there 
                                                  we may hide,
                                                  Under His mighty shade safe we 
                                                  abide.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joygiver.php

      You, You came along
      Wrapped Your arms around me made me strong
      You are my Joygiver (giver, giver)
      You give me strength, You urge me on
      Forget about the outside, inside I'm strong
      You are my Joygiver (giver, giver)
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/joys_are_flowing_like_a_river.php

  Joys are flowing like a river,
  Since the Comforter has come;
  He abides with us forever,
  Makes the trusting heart His home.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/judge_eternal_throned_in_splendor.php

                                                    Judge eternal, throned in 
                                                    splendor,
                                                    Lord of lords and King of 
                                                    kings,
                                                    With Thy living fire of 
                                                    judgment
                                                    Purge this land of bitter 
                                                    things;
                                                    Solace all its wide dominion
                                                    With the healing of Thy 
                                                    wings.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/judge_me_god_of_my_salvation.php

                                                      Judge me, God of my 
                                                      salvation,
                                                      Plead my cause, for Thee I 
                                                      trust;
                                                      Hear my earnest 
                                                      supplication,
                                                      Save me from my foes 
                                                      unjust;
                                                      O my soul, why art thou 
                                                      grieving?
                                                      What disquiets and 
                                                      dismays?
                                                      Hope in God; His help 
                                                      receiving,
                                                      I shall yet my Savior 
                                                      praise.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/judge_me_o_god_and_plead_my_cause.php

                                                        Judge me, O God, and 
                                                        plead my cause
                                                        Against a sinful race;
                                                        From vile oppression and 
                                                        deceit
                                                        Secure me by Thy grace.
                                                        From vile oppression and 
                                                        deceit
                                                        Secure me by Thy grace.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/judgment_has_set.php

                                                          The judgment has set, 
                                                          the books have been 
                                                          opened;
                                                          How shall we stand in 
                                                          that great day,
                                                          When every thought, 
                                                          and word, and action,
                                                          God, the righteous 
                                                          Judge, shall weigh?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/just_a_closer_walk_with_thee.php



am weak, but Thou art strong;
Jesus, keep me from all wrong;
I’ll be satisfied as long
As I walk, let me walk close to Thee.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/just_a_few_more_days_to_be_filled_with_praise.php



Just a few more days to be filled with praise,
And to tell the old, old story;
Then, when twilight falls, and my Savior calls,
I shall go to Him in glory.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/just_a_little_bit.php

      Chorus:
      God doesn't love us just a little bit (just a little bit)
      The Bible says so if you'll just read it
      You know I'm not guessing and it's not just a hunch (it's not a hunch)
      God loves us all a great big bunch
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/just_a_little_talk_with_jesus.php
I once was lost in sin but Jesus took me in
And then a little light from heaven filled my soul
It bathed my heart in love and wrote my name above
And just a little talk with Jesus made me whole

Now let us have a little talk with Jesus
Let us tell Him all about our troubles
He will hear our faintest cry
He will answer by and by
Now when you feel a little prayer wheel turning
And you know a little fire is burning
You will find a little talk with Jesus makes it right

Sometimes my path seems dreary without a ray of cheer
And then the cloud about me hides the light of day
The mists in me rise and hide the stormy skies
But just a little talk with Jesus clears the way

Now let us have a little talk with Jesus
Let us tell Him all about our troubles
He will hear our faintest cry
He will answer by and by
Now when you feel a little prayer wheel turning
And you know a little fire is burning
You will find a little talk with Jesus makes it right

I may have doubts and fears, my eyes be filled with tears
But Jesus is a friend who watches day and and night
I go to Him in prayer, He knows my every care
And just a little talk with Jesus makes it right

Now let us have a little talk with Jesus
Let us tell Him all about our troubles
He will hear our faintest cry
He will answer by and by
Now when you feel a little prayer wheel turning
And you know a little fire is burning
You will find a little talk with Jesus makes it right

You will find a little talk with Jesus makes it right
Makes everything righthttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/just_a_little_while.php



By E.M. Bartlett 1921

1.
Soon this life will all be over, 
And our pilgrimage will end.
Soon we'll take our heav’nly journey,
Be at home again with friends
Heaven's gates are standing open
Waiting for our entrance there
Some sweet day we're going over
All the beauties there to share.

Just a Little while to stay here
Just a little while to wait
Just a little while to labor
In the path that’s always straight
Just a little more of trouble
In this low and sinful state
Then we’ll enter Heaven’s portals,
Sweeping thru the pearly gates.

2.
Soon we’ll see the light of morning
Then the new day will begin
Soon we’ll hear the Father calling,
“Come my children, enter in."
Then we’ll hear a choir of angels
Singing out the vict’ry song,
All our troubles will be ended
And we’ll live with heaven’s throng

Just a Little while to stay here
Just a little while to wait
Just a little while to labor
In the path that’s always straight
Just a little more of trouble
In this low and sinful state
Then we’ll enter Heaven’s portals,
Sweeping thru the pearly gates.

3.
Soon we’ll meet again our loved ones
And we’ll take them by the hand,
Soon we’ll press them to our bosom
Over in the promised land;
Then we’ll be at home forever,
Thru-out all eternity,
What a blessed, blessed morning
That eternal morn shall be.

Just a Little while to stay here
Just a little while to wait
Just a little while to labor
In the path that’s always straight
Just a little more of trouble
In this low and sinful state
Then we’ll enter Heaven’s portals,
Sweeping thru the pearly gates.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/just_a_rose_will_do.php
When time shall come for my leaving
When I bid you adieu
Don't spend your money for flowers
Just a rose will do.

I'll go to a beautiful garden
At last when life's work is through.
Don't spend your money for flowers
Just a rose will do.

I'll need no organization
To make a bid to-do,
I'll need no fine decorations,
Just a rose will do.

I'll go to a beautiful garden
At last when life's work is through.
Don't spend your money for flowers
Just a rose will do.

Just have an old-fashioned preacher
To preach a sermon or two
Don't spend your money for flowers
Just a rose will do.

I'll go to a beautiful garden
At last when life's work is through.
Don't spend your money for flowers
Just a rose will do.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/just_a_word_for_jesus.php

                                                              Now just a word 
                                                              for Jesus;
                                                              Your dearest 
                                                              Friend so true;
                                                              Come, cheer our 
                                                              hearts and tell us
                                                              What He hath done 
                                                              for you.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/just_are_thy_ways.php

            Just are Thy ways, and true Thy Word,
            Great Rock of my secure abode:
            Who is a god beside the Lord?
            Or where’s a refuge like our God?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/just_as_i_am.php



Just as I am, without one plea,
But that Thy blood was shed for me,
And that Thou bidst me come to Thee,
O Lamb of God, I come, I come.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/just_as_i_am_thine_own_to_be.php

                                                                Just as I am, 
                                                                Thine own to be,
                                                                Friend of the 
                                                                young, Who 
                                                                lovest me,
                                                                To consecrate 
                                                                myself to Thee,
                                                                O Jesus Christ, 
                                                                I come.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/just_as_i_am_without_one_plea.php

                                                                  Just as I am, 
                                                                  without one 
                                                                  plea,
                                                                  But that Thy 
                                                                  blood was shed 
                                                                  for me,
                                                                  And that Thou 
                                                                  bidst me come 
                                                                  to Thee,
                                                                  O Lamb of God, 
                                                                  I come, I 
                                                                  come.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/just_for_today-2.php

                                                                      My Father, 
                                                                      this I ask 
                                                                      of Thee;
                                                                      Knowing 
                                                                      that Thou 
                                                                      wilt grant 
                                                                      the plea—
                                                                      For this, 
                                                                      and only 
                                                                      this, I 
                                                                      pray
                                                                      Strength 
                                                                      for 
                                                                      today—just 
                                                                      for today.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/just_lean_upon_the_arms_of_jesus.php



Just lean upon the arms of Jesus,
He’ll help you along, help you along,
If you will trust His love unfailing,
He’ll fill your heart with song.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/just_like_every_morning.php
Just like every morning
Waits for the sun
I wait for You, exalting Your love
Drops of dew, smell of mint
Your voice so sweet
I know You are here

Your caress is so light
Like a breeze it blows on me
No, I’m not alone
There’s a sincere love in me

My life, my way, is living to serve You
I’m feeling at this moment
Your hands touching mehttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/just_like_you_promised.php
Just like You promised You’ve come
Just like You told us You are here
And my desire is that You know
I love You, I worship You
I welcome You herehttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/just_one_glimpse.php

        Just one glimpse of the glory waiting,
        Just one note of the seraph’s song—
        How it cheers the heart that’s breaking,
        How it makes the spirit strong.
        Just one touch of the seamless garment,
        Just one clasp of the nail-pierced hand—
        How it calms the fevered pulses,
        How it helps the weak to stand.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/just_one_touch.php

                                                                        Just one 
                                                                        touch as 
                                                                        He moves 
                                                                        along,
                                                                        Pushed 
                                                                        and 
                                                                        pressed 
                                                                        by the 
                                                                        jostling 
                                                                        throng,
                                                                        Just one 
                                                                        touch 
                                                                        and the 
                                                                        weak was 
                                                                        strong,
                                                                        Cured by 
                                                                        the 
                                                                        Healer 
                                                                        divine.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/just_over_in_the_glory_land.php



I’ve a home prepared where the saints abide,
Just over in the glory land;
And I long to be by my Savior’s side,
Just over in the glory land.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/jesus_when_i_need_him.php



Just when I need Him, Jesus is near,
Just when I falter, just when I fear;
Ready to help me, ready to cheer,
Just when I need Him most.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/just_when_i_need_him_most.php

                                                                            Just 
                                                                            when 
                                                                            I 
                                                                            need 
                                                                            Him, 
                                                                            Jesus 
                                                                            is 
                                                                            near,
                                                                            Just 
                                                                            when 
                                                                            I 
                                                                            falter, 
                                                                            just 
                                                                            when 
                                                                            I 
                                                                            fear;
                                                                            Ready 
                                                                            to 
                                                                            help 
                                                                            me, 
                                                                            ready 
                                                                            to 
                                                                            cheer,
                                                                            Just 
                                                                            when 
                                                                            I 
                                                                            need 
                                                                            Him 
                                                                            most.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/just_when_i_need_him_jesus_is_near.php

  Just when I need Him, Jesus is near,
  Just when I falter, just when I fear;
  Ready to help me, ready to cheer,
  Just when I need Him most.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/just_where_i_am.php



Just where I am, oh, let me be
A faithful witness, Lord, for Thee;
While others seek a wider sphere,
Oh, keep me faithful, Lord, just here!
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_j/justa_passin_through.php

      Justi...Justi...Justi...Justifiedhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/a_king_might_miss_the_guiding_star.php



The King is coming in glory
To catch His bride away,
It may be in the morning
It may be at midday,
At the even or midnight;
The trump will sound so clear,
The dead in Christ, and we that live,
His voice shall hear.
Refrain

A king might miss the guiding star,
A wise man’s foot might stumble;
For Bethlehem is very far
From all except the humble.
’Tis Christmas Day! ’Tis Christmas Day!
And Christian hearts are humble.

Some pilgrims seek a hallowed shrine;
Some soldiers march to danger;
Some travelers seek an inn—its sign
“The Baby in a manger."
When Christ was born on Christmas morn,
They laid Him in a manger.

There is no palace in that place,
Nor any seat of learning,
No hilltop vision of God’s face,
No altar candles burning:
O come and see our Christmas tree
And Christmas candles burning.

But he who gets to Bethlehem
Shall hear the oxen lowing;
And, if he humbly kneel with them,
May catch far trumpets blowing;
From far away, on Christmas Day,
May hear God’s trumpets blowing.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/keep_me.php



In this wicked world am I,
Watch Thou o’er me from on high;
Keep my soul, lest I should be
Led astray, O Lord, from Thee. 

Refrain:
All I am or hope to be,
I commit, dear Lord, to Thee;
Oh, preserve me in Thy love,
Till I reach Thy courts above. 

Keep me spotless, keep me pure,
Keep me lest the world allure;
Keep me in Thy secret place,
Where I e’er may see Thy face. 

Keep me guiltless night and day,
Help me Thy commands obey;
Keep me humble, let not pride
Ever in my soul abide. 

Keep me gentle, let no word
From my lips be ever heard
That shall wound a tender heart,
Cause a tear of grief to start. 

Keep me for Thyself alone,
Nevermore to be mine own;
Keep me in Thy favor sweet,
In Thy grace and truth complete. 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/keep_me_ever_close_to_thee.php



Source from whence the stream of mercy
Like a river flows to me,
With Thy cords of love so tender
Bind and keep me close to Thee.
Refrain

Keep me ever close to Thee,
Blessèd Savior, dear to me,
With Thy cords of love so tender
Bind and keep me close to Thee;
Keep me ever close to Thee,
Blessèd Savior, dear to me,
Bind and keep me close to Thee.

Refrain

There my life, my hope and comfort,
There a refuge for my soul,
When the clouds hang darkly round me,
And the distant surges roll.

Refrain

There in holy, sweet communion
With Thy Spirit day by day,
Faith to realms of light and glory
Bears my raptured soul away.

Refrain

Close to Thee, O Savior, keep me,
Till I reach the shining shore,
Till I join the raptured army,
Shouting joy forevermore.

Refrain


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/keep_me_my_lord.php



Keep me in touch with Thee,
My blessed Lord;
Thine shall the glory be,
Mine the reward;
Cover my soul with grace,
In that most holy place,
Till I shall see Thy face,
Keep me, my Lord. 

Lord, with Thy gentleness,
I would be great;
Blest with Thy holiness,
Be this my state;
To Thee my all resign, 
Oh, let Thy will be mine,
In Thy great love divine,
Keep me, my Lord. 

Conquer my every foe,
While here I stay;
Unto the end I’ll go,
Let me not stray;
Down into nothingness,
Hid in Thy righteousness,
Firm in Thy faithfulness,
Keep me, my Lord. 

Oh, let Thy watchful eye,
Be over me;
Hear Thou my humble cry,
Coming to Thee;
Guide Thou my steps aright,
Be Thou my song at night,
My theme and heart’s delight,
Keep me, my Lord. 



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/keep_me_near_thee.php

Keep me near Thee, blessed Jesus,
Keep me near Thee lest I stray;
With Thy mighty hand uphold me,
Lead me gently all the way. 

Refrain:
Life without Thee would be dreary,
Cheerless all my path would be;
But while walking in Thy presence,
Heaven’s glory shines on me. 

Keep me near Thee, precious Savior,
Many snares are by the way;
’Neath Thy balmy wings protect me,
Draw me nearer Thee each day. 

Help me live so near Thee, Jesus,
That Thy whispers I may hear,
Let me feel Thy arms around me
When the hand of danger’s near. 

Draw me nearer, blessed Jesus,
Closely fold me to Thy breast;
Pillowed on Thy loving bosom,
Let me ever sweetly rest. 




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/keep_on_praying.php

Keep on praying to God on high,
Keep on praying, He hears your cry;
God will answer the sincere heart,
Keep on praying, He will do His part.
Refrain

For Jesus hears you,
He’s list’ning, list’ning to your plea,
So keep on praying,
And He will answer thee.

Refrain

Keep on praying when bowed with sin,
Keep on praying and you will win;
Jesus suffered on Calvary,
Keep on praying, He will answer thee.

Refrain

Keep on praying, you’ll grow in grace,
Keep on praying and win the race;
Jesus loves you, His Word is true,
Keep on praying, He will answer you.

Refrain

Keep on praying, He’s ever near,
Keep on praying, ’twill banish fear;
“Thro’ the valley" He’ll walk with thee;
Guide thy footsteps to eternity.

Refrain

Keep on praying all through the strife,
Prayer will purchase a crown of life;
Heav’n is ringing with songs above;
Hallelujahs, for a Savior’s love!

Refrain



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/keep_on_the_firing_line.php

If you池e in the battle for the Lord and right,

Keep on the firing line;
If you win, my brother, surely you must fight,
Keep on the firing line;
There are many dangers that we all must face,
If we die still fighting it is no disgrace;
Cowards in the service will not find a place,
So keep on the firing line. 

Refrain:
Oh, you must fight, be brave against all evil,
Never run, nor even lag behind;
If you would win for God and the right,
Just keep on the firing line. 

God will only use the soldier He can trust,
Keep on the firing line;
If you値l wear a crown then bear the cross you must,
Keep on the firing line.
Life is but to labor for the Master dear,
Help to banish evil and to spread good cheer;
Great you値l be rewarded for your service here,
So keep on the firing line. 

When we get to heaven, brother, we値l be glad,
Keep on the firing line;
How we値l praise the Savior for the call we had,
Keep on the firing line;
When we see the souls that we have helped to win,
Leading them to Jesus, from the paths of sin,
With a shout of welcome, we will all march in,
So keep on the firing line. 



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/keep_on_the_sunny_side.php

There's a dark and a trouble side of life there's a bright and a sunny side too
Though we meet with the darkness and strife the sunny side we also have in view
So keep on the sunny side always on the sunny side keep on the sunny side of 
life
It will help you everyday it will brighten all the way
If you'll keep on the sunny side of life

Oh the storm in its fury broke today crushing hopes that I cherish so dear
Clouds and storms will in time pass away and the sun again will shine bright and 
clear
So keep on the sunny side...
[ guitar - steel ]
Let us greed with a song of hope each day though the moments be cloudy or fair
Let us trust at our Saviour always will keep us everyone in his care
So keep on the sunny side...
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/keep_on_watching.php

On the hilltops, on the mountains,
There are gleams of golden light,
For the promised morn is dawning,
And its star is growing bright.
Refrain

Keep on watching, O ye faithful,
For the time is drawing nigh—
We shall see the King of glory
With His angels, by and by.

O the promised morn is dawning,
When the ransomed of the King
Shall return and come to Zion,
And His praise forever sing.

Refrain

Hallelujah! what a moment,
When the dead in Christ shall rise,
And the trumpet of the ages
Sound in triumph from the skies!

Refrain

Keep on watching, be not weary,
For the Lord will surely come;
He has said, and we believe it,
He will take His people home.

Refrain
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/keep_prayin.php

Spoken Vocal:
What if I don't give you the justice you want and you will be the death of me?

Hey! Pss...yeah, yall come
Gather 'round 

Now let me tell you the story
The Lord told His disciples to pray and not give up
Now there was a town, a judge, they tell me he lived within
Didn't care for nobody, not God, nor big bad men
In the same little place there lived a widow
Bout four foot three
Louder than Gabriel when she shouted the same old plea
"Now listen your honor I'm tellin' the story as plain as it can be
I'm needin' some justice against my adversary
I need it, I want it, I got to have it!" 

Chorus 1:
(Whenever His children call) Whenever God's children call
(God hears them all) He hears them all
(He's never far away) He's never, never, never far away
(Pray every day) Pray every day
(Never) Never give up
(Give up) Never give in
(Praying) Pray on 

He kept tellin' her,
"Never, now woman you know you're worryin' me
But if I don't give the justice you're wanting
You will be the death of me! (death of me)"
Now if you were blind you could see it as plain as the nose He gave to you
If they can achieve some justice, well think of the things the Lord can do
Now sometimes the wicked they make you sick
But don't be discouraged 'cause justice is comin' quick (justice is coming 
quick)
Please don't think that nobody cares about you
He'll be in the schoolyard (yhe schoolyard)
The workplace (yhe workplace), whatever you do (yes)
He said it, He meant it, and I believe it (I said I believe it) 

Chorus 2:
(Whenever His children call) Children are callin' Him from all over the world
(God hears them all) But He hears them all
(He's never far away) My God is not far away
(Pray every day)
You got to pray (never Give up Praying) 

Bridge:
Oh, Children prayin' (children prayin')
Pleasin' the Lord (pleasin' the Lord)
And His will obeying (will obeying)
His Holy Word (Holy Word)
Get our hearts together (hearts together)
In one accord (in one accord)
His grace and blessings (grace and blessings)
Is their reward (their reward) 

Now if you're wonderin' what is the message we're sendin' in this small tune
Justice is comin' when you need it, and it might be soon
Now we'd like to leave you with somethin' to keep on your mind as you sing this 
song
Well if you are prayin' to Jesus
Keep prayin' and prayin' you can't go wrong 

("Keep prayin' and prayin' and prayin', you can't go wrong" repeated in 
background)
Listen here youngsta,
You think cause you got your eyes closed youe and arms folded
You're prayin' huh?
Well, that's what they told me in church
Oh ya ain't got to have your mouth movin' just to be prayin
Well, it's no use anyway cause I prayed Sunday and nothin' happened
Now see, see that's what your problem is right there
You need to pray everyday, not just Sunday and Wednesday
Are you sure?
You need to be prayin' every day of the week
Well, would-
Oh, we got to pray! We got to pray youngsta, we got to pray
Make a difference 

Stepouts 

Brothers keep on, keep prayin!
(Oh, is that it?) 
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/keep_silence_all_created_things.php

Keep silence, all created things,
And wait your Maker’s nod!
My soul stands trembling while she sings
The honors of her God.

Life, death, and hell, and worlds unknown
Hang on His firm decree;
He sits on no precarious throne,
No borrows leave to be.

Chained to His throne, a volume lies,
With all the fates of men,
With every angel’s form and size,
Drawn by th’eternal pen.

His providence unfolds the book,
And makes His counsels shine;
Each opening leaf, and every stroke
Fulfills some deep design.

Here He exalts neglected worms
To scepters and a crown;
And there the following page He turns,
And treads the monarch down.

Not Gabriel asks the reason why,
Nor God the reason gives;
Nor dares the favorite angel pry
Between the folded leaves.

My God, I would not long to see
My fate with curious eyes,
What gloomy lines are writ for me,
Or what bright scenes may rise.

In Thy fair book of life and grace,
O may I find my name
Recorded in some humble place,
Beneath my Lord the Lamb!
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/keep_telling_it.php

If there is abundance of joy in your heart,
Made bright by the light from above,
If Jesus has bidden your sorrows depart,
Keep telling the story of love.

Refrain

Keep telling, keep telling,
Of Jesus and Heaven above;
Keep telling to others you meet on the way,
The wonderful story of love.

If you would win others for Jesus today,
Bright stars for your crown up above,
Keep joyfully telling to all on the way,
The beautiful story of love.

Refrain

Keep telling of Jesus, His cross and His grave,
Keep telling of Heaven above;
Keep telling—Christ risen and able to save,
The powerful story of love.

Refrainhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/keep_the_heart_singing.php

We may lighten toil and care,
Or a heavy burden share,
With a word, a kindly deed, or sunny smile;
We may girdle day and night
With a halo of delight,
If we keep the heart singing all the while. 

Refrain:
Keep the heart singing all the while;
Make the world brighter with a smile;
Keep the song ringing! Lonely hours we may beguile,
If we keep the heart singing all the while. 

If His love is in the soul,
And we yield to His control,
Sweetest music will the lonely hours beguile;
We may drive the clouds away,
Cheer and bless the darkest day,
If we keep the heart singing all the while. 

How a word of love will cheer,
Kindle hope, and banish fear,
Soothe a pain, or take away the sting of guile;
Oh, how much we all may do,
In the world we travel through,
If we keep the heart singing all the while. https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/keep_thou_me.php

Jesus, Savior, oh, how trustfully
I lean on Thee where’er I go;
In Thy mercy Thou wilt shelter me,
From storms that beat, and winds that blow.
Refrain

Trusting, I am trusting,
Trusting, I am trusting;
Trusting, trusting, Lord, in Thee;
Ever keep Thou me.

Jesus, Savior, oh, how tenderly
Within my heart Thy words I hear;
Thro’ Thy Spirit sweetly telling me,
That I am safe, for Thou art near.

Refrain

Jesus, Savior, oh, how joyfully
I give my all to Thy control;
Clouds may gather, yet how peacefully,
The sun shines brightly in my soul.

Refrain

Jesus, Savior, Thou hast promised me
That o’er life’s billows, wild and dark,
Safely, surely Thou wilt anchor me,
And homeward bring my wave-tossed bark.

Refrain
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/keep_thou_my_way.php

Keep Thou my way, O Lord, be Thou ever nigh;
Strong is Thy mighty arm, weak and frail am I;
Then, my unchanging Friend, on Thee, my hopes depend,
Till life’s brief day shall end, be Thou ever nigh.

Keep Thou my heart, O Lord, ever close to Thee;
Safe in Thine arms of love, shall my refuge be;
Then, over a tranquil tide, my bark shall safely glide;
I shall be satisfied, ever close to Thee.

Keep Thou my all, O Lord, hide my life in Thine;
O let Thy sacred light over my pathway shine;
Kept by Thy tender care, gladly the cross I’ll bear;
Hear Thou and grant my prayer, hide my life in Thine.

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/keep_thyself_pure.php

Keep thyself pure! Christ’s soldier, hear,
Through life’s loud strife, the calls rings clear.
Thy Captain speaks: His word obey;
So shall thy strength by as thy day.

Keep thyself pure! Thrice blessèd he
Whose heart from taint of sin is free;
His feet shall stand where saints have trod,
He with rapt eyes shall see his God.

Keep thyself pure! For He Who died,
Himself for thy sake sanctified;
Then hear Him speaking from the skies,
And victor o’er temptation rise.

O Holy Spirit, keep us pure,
Grant us Thy strength when sins allure;
Our bodies are Thy temple, Lord;
Be Thou in thought and act adored.

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/keep_your_colors_flying.php



Keep your colors flying,
All ye Christian youth,
To Christ’s call replying,
Full of grace and truth.
Rise in strength and beauty,
In life’s morning glow,
Answer to each duty,
Onward, upward go.
Refrain

Keep your colors flying,
Stand for God and truth,
Keep your colors flying,
All ye Christian youth.

Life is all before you
Where to choose your way,
Keep Christ’s colors o’er you;
Watch and fight and pray,
With a firm endeavor,
Ev’ry foe defy,
True to Jesus ever,
Lift your colors high.

Refrain

Keep your colors flying,
Never think of ease;
Sin and self denying,
Jesus only please.
Not for worldly pleasure,
Not for worldly fame,
Not for heaps of treasure,
Live for Jesus’ Name!

Refrain

Keep your colors flying,
Walk as Jesus did;
In Him living, dying,
Let your life be hid;
Hoping, trusting, ever,
Breathe this mortal breath;
You shall live forever,
Christ has conquered death.

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/kept_by_the_power_of_god.php



We are kept by the power and favor of God
From all the dominion of sin;
He cleanseth by faith in His own precious blood,
His spirit is reigning within. 

Refrain:
We are kept by the power of God,
We are kept by the power of God;
By trusting, obeying,
By watching and praying,
We are kept by the power of God. 

We are kept by the power of God through faith
So long as we walk in the light;
Our helper is Jesus who faithfully saith,
“I’m with you by day and by night." 

We are kept by the power of God if we trust,
We never need faint by the way;
Then do as He bids you, His counsel is just,
Be humble, be watchful, and pray. 

We are kept by the power of God each day,
The story of grace we’ll repeat;
Through Him we are conquerors if we obey,
The foe we will ever defeat. 


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/kept_for_jesus.php



Oh, to be 適ept for Jesus!"
Kept, by the power of God;
Kept from the world unspotted,
Treading where Jesus trod.
Refrain

Oh, to be 適ept for Jesus!"
Lord, at Thy feet I fall;
I would be 渡othing, nothing, nothing";
Thou shall be 殿ll in all."

Oh, to be 適ept for Jesus!"
Serving as He shall choose;
適ept" for the Master?s pleasure;
適ept" for the Master?s use.

Refrain

Oh, to be 適ept for Jesus!"
Kept from the world apart;
Lowly in mind and spirit,
Gentle and pure in heart.

Refrain

Oh, to be 適ept for Jesus!"
Oh, to be all His own;
Kept, to be His forever,
Kept, to be His alone!

Refrain

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/kind_words_can_never_die.php



Kind words can never die; cherished and blest,
God knows how deep they lie, stored in the breast;
Like childhood’s simple rhymes, said o’er a thousand times;
Aye, in all years and climes, distant and near.

Refrain 1:
Kind words can never die, never die, never die;
Kind words can never die, no, never die. 

Sweet thoughts can never die, though, like the flow’rs,
Their brightest hues may fly in wintry hours;
But when the gentle dew gives them their charms anew,
With many an added hue they bloom again.

Refrain 2:
Sweet thoughts can never die, never die, never die;
Sweet thoughts can never die, no, never die. 

Our souls can never die, though in the tomb
We all may have to lie, wrapped in its gloom;
What though the flesh decay, souls pass in peace away,
Live though eternal day, with Christ above.

Refrain 3:
Our souls can never die, never die, never die;
Our souls can never die, no, never die. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/kindly_spring_again_is_here.php

Kindly spring again is here,
trees and fields in bloom appear;
hark! the birds with artless lays
warble their Creator's praise.

Where in winter all was snow,
now the flowers in clusters grow;
and the corn, in green array,
promises a harvest-day.

Lord, afford a spring to me,
let me feel what I see;
speak, and by thy gracious voice,
make my drooping soul rejoice.

On thy garden deign to smile,
raise the plants, enrich the soil;
soon thy presence will restore
life to what seemed dead before.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/kindred_in_christ.php

1. Kindred in Christ, For His Dear Sake
A hearty welcome here receive;
May we together now partake
The joys which only he can give.

2. To you and us by grace 'tis giv'n.
To know the Savior's precious name;
And shortly we shall meet in heav'n
Our hope, our way, our end the same.

3. May he, by whose kind care we meet,
Send His good Spirit from above,
Make our communication sweet,
And cause our hearts to burn with love.

4. Forgotten be each worldly theme,
When Christians see each other thus:
We only wish to speak of Him
Who lived, and died, and reigns for us.

5. We'll talk of all he did and said,
And suffered for us here below;
The path He marked for us to tread,
And what he's doing for us now.

6. Thus as the moments pass away,
We'll love, and wonder, and adore;
And hasten to the glorious day
When we shall meet to part no more.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/king_is_coming.php

Praise God, He's coming for me
The marketplace is empty, no more traffic in the street
All the builder's tools are silent, no more time to harvest wheat
Busy housewives cease their labor, in the courtroom no debate
Work on earth has been suspended as the King comes through the gate

Happy faces line the hallway, those whose lives have been redeemed
Broken homes He has mended, those from prison He has freed
Little children and the aged hand in hand stand all a-glow
Who were crippled, broken, ruined, clad in garments white as snow

Chorus:
The King is coming, the King is coming
I just heard the trumpet sounding and soon His face I'll see
The King is coming, the King is coming
Praise God, He's coming for me

I can hear the chariot's rumble, I can see the marching throng
And the fury of God's trumpet spells the end of sin and wrong
Regal rolls are now unfolded, heaven's grandstands all in place
Heaven's choir is now assembled, start to sing "Amazing Grace"

Repeat Chorus (x2)

Praise God, He's coming for me, for me, for me
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/king_of_glory_king_of_peace.php

King of glory, King of peace,
I will love Thee;
And that love may never cease,
I will move Thee.
Thou hast granted my request,
Thou hast heard me;
Thou didst note my working breast,
Thou hast spared me.

Wherefore with my utmost art
I will sing Thee,
And the cream of all my heart
I will bring Thee.
Though my sins against me cried,
Thou alone didst clear me;
And alone, when they replied,
Thou didst hear me.

Seven whole days, not one in seven,
I will praise Thee;
In my heart, though not in Heaven,
I can raise Thee.
Small it is, in this poor sort
To enroll Thee:
E’en eternity’s too short
To extol Thee.




https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/king_of_heaven_lord_most_high.php

Immortal, invisible, King of Heaven, Lord Most High
Honor now we give to You, Author of eternal life
Power, wisdom, strength, and blessing, You are worthy to receive our praise
Immortal, invisible, Lord to You all praise be!

Immortal, invisible, Ever faithful ever true
Overcome with love and awe, Lord of Hosts we worship You.
Now in humble adoration, placing all before Your royal throne
Immortal, invisible, Savior we are Yours alone!






https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/king_of_kings.php

Chorus:
King of Kings and Lord of Lords glory hallelujah
King of Kings and Lord of Lords forever the same
King of Kings and Lord of Lords glory hallelujah
King of Kings and Lord of Lords glory praise His name
Repeat Chorus

Written through the tapestry of time there is a legend
Of a man who loved until the bride took His life
Living in her broken world of lies and deception
As He takes her pain and sin, easing her strife

A call comes ringing out across the plain
Telling us that Jesus Christ is risen - Again (yeah, yeah, yeah)

Repeat Chorus

Found within society is poverty and hating
When it comes to knowing who the life giver is
Sitting back in padded pews we're not contemplating
Going out to all the world and making them His

And so the cross it would seem was for vain
(forever and ever,forever and ever,forever and ever,forever and ever)
Still the call rings telling all He's risen - Again (yeah, yeah, yeah)

Repeat Chorus

Repeat Chorus (with below)
King of Kings (forever and ever, hallelujah, hallelujah)
And Lord of Lords (forever and ever, hallelujah, hallelujah)

King of Kings and Lords hallelujah (repeat with below)
And He shall reign forever, He shall reign forever
He shall reign forever, He shall reign forever
King of Kings, Lord of Lords (and ever), King of Kings (He shall reign forever)

King of Kings, King of Kings, King of Kings
King of Kings!

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/king_of_kings2.php

King of Kings and Lord of Lords
Glory, hallelujah
King of Kings and Lord of Lords
Glory, hallelujah
King of Kings and Lord of Lords
Glory, hallelujah 
King of Kings and Lord of Lords (Jesus, Prince of Peace)
Glory hallelujah
King of Kings and Lord of Lords (Jesus, Prince of Peace)
Glory hallelujah
King of Kings and Lord of Lords (Jesus, Prince of Peace)
Glory hallelujah
King of Kings and Lord of Lords (Jesus, Prince of Peace)
Glory hallelujah 

King of Kings and Lord of Lords
Glory, hallelujah
King of Kings and Lord of Lords
Glory, hallelujah 

Repeat Verse 1 

Repeat Verse 2 

King of Kings and Lord of Lords
Glory, hallelujah
King of Kings and Lord of Lords
Glory, hallelujah 

Repeat Verse 1 

King of Kings and Lord of Lords (Jesus, Prince of Peace)
Glory hallelujah
King of Kings and Lord of Lords (Jesus, Prince of Peace)
Glory hallelujah 



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/king_of_my_life_i_crown_thee_now.php

King of my life, I crown Thee now,
Thine shall the glory be;
Lest I forget Thy thorn crowned brow,
Lead me to Calvary.
Refrain

Lest I forget Gethsemane,
Lest I forget Thine agony;
Lest I forget Thy love for me,
Lead me to Calvary.

Show me the tomb where Thou wast laid,
Tenderly mourned and wept;
Angels in robes of light arrayed
Guarded Thee whilst Thou slept.

Refrain

Let me like Mary, through the gloom,
Come with a gift to Thee;
Show to me now the empty tomb,
Lead me to Calvary.

Refrain

May I be willing, Lord, to bear
Daily my cross for Thee;
Even Thy cup of grief to share,
Thou hast borne all for me.

Refrain



https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/king_of_saints.php

Great and marvelous are Thy works
Lord God almighty
Just and true are Thy ways oh Lord
For You are the King of saints

Who shall not fear Thee
Who shall not glorify Thy name oh Lord
For only Thou are holy
All the nations shall come
And worship before Thee

For Thy judgments are made manifest
For Thy judgments are made manifest

Hallelujah

Hallelujah to the King of saints

Glory hallelujah

Glory hallelujah to the King of saints

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/king_of_saints_to_whom_the_number.php

King of saints, to Whom the number
Of Thy starry host is known,
Many a name, by man forgotten,
Lives forever round Thy throne;
Lights, which earth-born mists have darkened,
There are shining full and clear,
Princes in the court of Heaven,
Nameless, unremembered here.

In the roll of Thine apostles
One there stands, Bartholomew,
He for whom today we offer,
Year by year, our praises due;
How he toiled for Thee and suffered
None on earth can now record;
All his saintly life is hidden
In the knowledge of his Lord.

Was it he, beneath the fig tree
Seen of Thee, and guileless found;
He who saw the good he longed for
Rise from Nazareth’s barren ground;
He who met his risen Master
On the shore of Galilee;
He to whom the word was spoken,
“Greater things thou yet shall see"?

None can tell us; all is written
In the Lamb’s great book of life,
All the faith, and prayer, and patience,
All the toiling, and the strife;
There are told Thy hidden treasures;
Number us, O Lord, with them,
When Thou makest up the jewels
Of Thy living diadem.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/king_of_saints_we_offer.php

King of saints, we offer
highest praise to thee,
who didst free thy servants
from captivity;
sending thine apostles
to convey thy grace
unto every nation
and to every race.

Two of thine apostles 
we remember now,
whom thou didst so freely
with thy grace endow.
Thou unto Saint Philip
hast thyself revealed,
one with God the Father
though in flesh concealed.

O how can we thank thee
for the light conferred
by Saint James thy servant,
in his faithful word.
Like these two apostles
faithful unto death,
may we love and serve thee
till our latest breath.

Make us dear Redeemer,
more and more like thee,
be the Way to lead us
o'er life's dark sea;
be the Truth to light us
to our home on high;
be the Life within us
that can never die.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/king_of_zion.php

Zion’s mount His royal seat,
And no pow’r His throne shall move;
Ages gather at His feet,
Son of God’s eternal love.
Refrain

Hail, hail, King of Zion!
Hail, Lord of lords, and King of kings!
Reign forever, King of Zion;
Reign, blessèd King, forevermore.

All the world His Name shall fear,
All the world from shore to shore;
Every isle His voice shall hear,
And the heathen rage no more.

Refrain

He shall mold each stubborn will,
As the potter molds the clay,
Till rebellious hearts are stilled,
And submissive to His sway.

Refrain

Haste our early gifts to bring,
Haste obedient faith to prove,
Haste with songs to Zion’s King,
Son of God’s eternal love.

Refrain
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/kneel_at_the_cross.php

Kneel at the cross,
Christ will meet you there,
Come while he waits for you;
List to his voice,
Leave with him your care
And begin life a new. 

Kneel at the cross,
There is room for all
Who would His glory share;
Bliss there awaits,
Harm can ne'er befall
Those who are anchored there.
Refrain

Kneel at the cross,
Give your idols up,
Look unto realms above;
Turn not away
To life's sparkling cup;
Trust only in His love.


Refrain: 
Kneel at the cross,
(Kneel at the cross Kneel at the cross),
Leave ev'ry care
(Leave ev'ry care Leave ev'ry care);
Kneel at the cross,
(Kneel at the cross),
Jesus will meet you there.
https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/knock_and_it_shall_be_opened.php

O’er the door of heaven’s kingdom
Are the words forever true,
“If ye knock it shall be opened"—
Opened, sinner, yes, to you. 

Refrain:
Sinner, come, why still delay?
Knock at mercy’s door today;
“Lost and guilty," be thy plea,
Then ’twill open wide to thee. 

Oh, how kind this proclamation
To the vilest sinner lost—
Perfect, free and full salvation,
Purchased at a boundless cost. 

See the blessed invitation:
“He that knocks may enter in";
Will you now accept the offer,
Casting off your load of sin? 

Have you long withstood His mercy?
Has your heart unfeeling grown?
“He that knocketh here may enter,"
Is as sure as heaven’s throne. 

Come, poor sinner, read the writing,
Knock at mercy’s door today;
Hear the love of God inviting,
Come and enter while you may. 

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/knockin_on_your_door.php

Knock)
Spoken Vocal: "What was that?" "I think somebody’s knocking at the door" "Who 
could that be at this hour?"
Chorus 1:
The Savior is knockin’ at your door
Won’t you let Him in
He’s knockin’ at your door
Won’t you let Him in
Knock and the door will be opened to you
If you will answer He’ll carry you through
He’s knockin’ (knock, knock)
Knockin’ at your door (knockin' at your door)

Repeat Chorus 1

In these days of tribulation
We’re oppressed by what we hear (what we hear)
And the worldly noise around us
Can distract us from what’s clear
We must never fail to listen to what He has called us for
‘Cause He is knockin’ (knock, knock)
Knockin’ at your door

Chorus 2:
The Savior is knockin’ at your door
Won’t you let Him in
He’s knockin’ at your door (won't you let Him in)
Won’t you let Him in
Knock and the door will be opened to you (and He will answer you too)
If you will answer He’ll carry you through
He’s knockin’ (knock, knock)
Knockin’ at your door (knockin' at your door)

Now there are those who heard the calling
But continue on their way (on their way)
Someday I will obey Him
That’s exactly what they say
But I know a day is coming
And that’s one thing for sure
And He’ll be knockin’ (knock, knock)
Knockin’ at your door

Chorus 3:
The Savior is knockin’ at your door (won't you let Him in)
Won’t you let Him in
He’s knockin’ at your door (won't you let the Savior in)
Won’t you let Him in
Knock and the door will be opened to you
If you will answer He’ll carry you through
He’s knockin’ (knock, knock)
Knockin’ at your door (knockin' at your door)

Chorus 4:
The Savior is knockin’ at your door (the Savior is knockin' at your door)
Won’t you let Him in
He’s knockin’ at your door (I've heard Him knockin' like this before)
Won’t you let Him in
Knock and the door will be opened to you (and He will carry you through)
If you will answer He’ll carry you through
He’s knockin’ (knock, knock)
Knockin’ at your door (knockin' at your door)

He is knockin’ (knock, knock)
Knockin’ at your door (knockin' at your door)
Oh yeah He’s knockin’ (knock, knock)
Knockin’ at your door (don't you hear knockin' at your door) (knockin' at your 
door)


https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/knocking_knocking_who_is_there.php

Knocking, knocking, who is there?
Waiting, waiting, oh, how fair!
’Tis a Pilgrim, strange and kingly,
Never such was seen before,
Ah, my soul, for such a wonder,
Wilt thou not undo the door?

Knocking, knocking! still He’s there:
Waiting, waiting, wondrous fair!
But the door is hard to open
For the weeds and ivy vine,
With their dark and clinging tendrils,
Ever round the hinges twine.

Knocking, knocking—what, still there?
Waiting, waiting, grand and fair!
Yes, the piercèd hand still knocketh,
And beneath the crownèd hair
Beam the patient eyes, so tender,
Of thy Savior waiting there.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/know_ye_the_lord_has_borne_away.php

Know ye the Lord hath borne away
Your Master from your head today?
Yea, we know it; yet we raise
Joyous strains of hope and praise!
He is gone, but not before
All His earthly work is o’er.
Alleluia!

Know ye the Lord hath borne away
Your Master from your head today?
Yea, we know it; stand afar;
Mark His bright triumphal car,
Mighty end of mighty deeds,
Clouds His chariot, winds His steeds!
Alleluia!

Know ye the Lord hath borne away
Your Master from your head today?
Yea, we know it; ere He left,
Jordan’s stream in twain was cleft;
With that glorious act in view,
We shall one day cleave it, too!
Alleluia!

Know ye the Lord hath borne away
Your Master from your head today?
Yea, we know it; wondrous love
Bids Him seek His Home above;
He hath said ’tis better so;
See His mantle dropped below!
Alleluia!

Know ye the Lord hath borne away
Your Master from your head today?
Yea, we know it; lo! we trace
Plenteous portions of His grace,
Sent to all whose hearts can soar
Whither He has gone before.
Alleluia!

Know ye the Lord hath borne away
Your Master from your head today?
Yea, we know it; search would fail,
If ye passed through mount and vale;
Earth contains Him not, though wide;
Seek Him at His Father’s side!
Alleluia!
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/kum_ba_yah.php

Kum ba yah, my Lord, kum ba yah!
Kum ba yah, my Lord, kum ba yah!
Kum ba yah, my Lord, kum ba yah!
O Lord, kum ba yah!

Someone’s laughing, Lord, kum ba yah!
Someone’s laughing, Lord, kum ba yah!
Someone’s laughing, Lord, kum ba yah!
O Lord, kum ba yah!

Someone’s crying, Lord, kum ba yah!
Someone’s crying, Lord, kum ba yah!
Someone’s crying, Lord, kum ba yah!
O Lord, kum ba yah!

Someone’s praying, Lord, kum ba yah!
Someone’s praying, Lord, kum ba yah!
Someone’s praying, Lord, kum ba yah!
O Lord, kum ba yah!

Someone’s singing, Lord, kum ba yah!
Someone’s singing, Lord, kum ba yah!
Someone’s singing, Lord, kum ba yah!
O Lord, kum ba yah!

Kum ba yah, my Lord, kum ba yah!
Kum ba yah, my Lord, kum ba yah!
Kum ba yah, my Lord, kum ba yah!
O Lord, kum ba yah!
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/kum_by_ya.php

Kum ba yah, my Lord, kum ba yah!
Kum ba yah, my Lord, kum ba yah!
Kum ba yah, my Lord, kum ba yah!
O Lord, kum ba yah! 

Someone is praying, Lord, kum ba yah!
Someone is praying, Lord, kum ba yah!
Someone is praying, Lord, kum ba yah!
O Lord, kum ba yah! 

Someone is crying, Lord, kum ba yah!
Someone is crying, Lord, kum ba yah!
Someone is crying, Lord, kum ba yah!
O Lord, kum ba yah! 

Someone is singing, Lord, kum ba yah!
Someone is singing, Lord, kum ba yah!
Someone is singing, Lord, kum ba yah!
O Lord, kum ba yah! 

Kum ba yah, my Lord, kum ba yah!
Kum ba yah, my Lord, kum ba yah!
Kum ba yah, my Lord, kum ba yah!
O Lord, kum ba yah! 
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/the_king_is_coming.php

Rejoice! Rejoice! our King is coming!
And the time will not be long,
Until we hail the radiant dawning,
And lift up the glad new song.
Refrain

Oh, wondrous day! oh, glorious morning,
When the Son of Man shall come!
May we with lamps all trimmed and burning
Gladly welcome His return!
Rejoice! Rejoice! our King is coming!
And the time will not be long,
Until we hail the radiant dawning,
And lift up the glad new song.

With joy we wait our King’s returning
From His heavenly mansions fair;
And with ten thousand saints appearing
We shall meet Him in the air.

Refrain

Oh, may we never weary, watching,
Never lay our armor down
Until He come, and with rejoicing
Give to each the promised crown.

Refrain

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/the_king_is_coming_in_glory.php

The King is coming in glory
To catch His bride away,
It may be in the morning
It may be at midday,
At the even or midnight;
The trump will sound so clear,
The dead in Christ, and we that live,
His voice shall hear.
Refrain

The King is coming, hallelujah!
He’s coming in the air,
The fig tree is budding,
The signs are everywhere,
The King is coming, hallelujah!
He’s coming in the air,
He’s coming, hallelujah!
To catch His bride away.

Behold! He cometh, and leaping,
And skipping o’er the hills;
Like the young roe, like the young hart,
My soul with rapture thrills;
Thru the window He’s looking,
Thru the lattice work is seen,
The winter’s past, the rain is o’er,
The figs are green.

Refrain

The King is coming,
“Be ready," To meet Him on that day;
With your heart right, with your robes white,
And in this holy way;
Like the lightning that flashes
In the twinkling of an eye,
Our Lord shall come to claim His own,
He’s drawing nigh.

The saints are looking ever upward
While journ’ing on their way.
He’s coming, hallelujah!
To catch His bride away.
The saints are looking ever upward
While journ’ing on their way.
He’s coming, hallelujah!
To catch His bride away.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/the_king_of_glory_standeth.php

The King of Glory standeth beside the heart of sin;
His mighty voice commandeth the raging waves within;
The floods of deepest anguish roll backward at His will,
As o’er the storm ariseth His mandate, “Peace, be still."

At times, with sudden glory, He speaks, and all is done;
Without one stroke of battle the victory is won,
While we, with joy beholding, can scarce believe it true
That e’en our kingly Jesus can form such hearts anew.

O Christ, Thy love is mighty; long suffering is Thy grace;
And glorious is the splendor that beameth from Thy face.
Our hearts upleap in gladness when we behold that love,
As we go singing onward, to dwell with Thee above.

 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/the_king_of_heaven.php

The King of Heav’n His table spreads,
And blessings crown the board;
Not paradise, with all its joys,
Could such delight afford.

Pardon and peace to dying men,
And endless life are giv’n,
Through the rich blood that Jesus shed
To raise our souls to Heav’n.

Ye hungry poor, that long have strayed
In sin’s dark mazes, come:
Come from the hedges and highways
And grace shall find you room.

Millions of souls, in glory now,
Were fed and feasted here;
And millions more, still on the way,
Around the board appear.

Yet is His house and heart so large,
That millions more may come;
Nor could the wide assembling world
O’erfill the spacious room.

All things are ready, come away,
Nor weak excuses frame;
Crowd to your places at the feast;
And bless the Founder’s Name.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/the_king_of_love_my_shepherd_is.php

The King of love my Shepherd is,
Whose goodness faileth never,
I nothing lack if I am His
And He is mine forever.

Where streams of living water flow
My ransomed soul He leadeth,
And where the verdant pastures grow,
With food celestial feedeth.

Perverse and foolish oft I strayed,
But yet in love He sought me,
And on His shoulder gently laid,
And home, rejoicing, brought me.

In death’s dark vale I fear no ill
With Thee, dear Lord, beside me;
Thy rod and staff my comfort still,
Thy cross before to guide me.

Thou spread’st a table in my sight;
Thy unction grace bestoweth;
And O what transport of delight
From Thy pure chalice floweth!

And so through all the length of days
Thy goodness faileth never;
Good Shepherd, may I sing Thy praise
Within Thy house forever.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/the_king_shall_come_when_the_morning_dawns.php

The King shall come when morning dawns,
And light triumphant breaks;
When beauty gilds the eastern hills,
And life to joy awakes.

Not as of old a little child
To bear, and fight, and die,
But crowned with glory like the sun
That lights the morning sky.

O brighter than the rising morn
When He, victorious, rose,
And left the lonesome place of death,
Despite the rage of foes.

O brighter than that glorious morn
Shall this fair morning be,
When Christ, our King, in beauty comes,
And we His face shall see.

The King shall come when morning dawns,
And earth’s dark night is past;
O haste the rising of that morn,
The day that aye shall last.

And let the endless bliss begin,
By weary saints foretold,
When right shall triumph over wrong,
And truth shall be extolled.

The King shall come when morning dawns,
And light and beauty brings:
Hail, Christ the Lord! Thy people pray,
Come quickly, King of kings.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/the_kingdom_is_coming.php

From all the dark places of earth’s heathen races,
O see how the thick shadows fly!
The voice of salvation awakes every nation,
Come over and help us, they cry.
Refrain

The kingdom is coming, O tell ye the story,
God’s banner exalted shall be!
The earth shall be full of His knowledge and glory,
As waters that cover the sea.

The sunlight is glancing o’er armies advancing
To conquer the kingdoms of sin;
Our Lord shall possess them,
His presence shall bless them,
His beauty shall enter them in.

Refrain

With shouting and singing, and jubilant ringing,
Their arms of rebellion cast down;
At last every nation the Lord of salvation
Their King and Redeemer shall crown!

Refrainhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/the_kings_business.php

I am a stranger here, within a foreign land;
My home is far away, upon a golden strand;
Ambassador to be of realms beyond the sea,
I’m here on business for my King.
Refrain

This is the message that I bring,
A message angels fain would sing:
“Oh, be ye reconciled,"
Thus saith my Lord and King,
“Oh, be ye reconciled to God."

This is the King’s command: that all men, everywhere,
Repent and turn away from sin’s seductive snare;
That all who will obey, with Him shall reign for aye,
And that’s my business for my King.

Refrain

My home is brighter far than Sharon’s rosy plain,
Eternal life and joy throughout its vast domain;
My Sovereign bids me tell how mortals there may dwell,
And that’s my business for my King.

Refrainhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/the_kings_highway.php

Wherever you may be, whatever you may see,
That would lead you into evil, say you nay,
I will not turn aside; whatever may betide,
I’ll keep along the middle of the King’s highway.
Refrain

The King’s highway, the King’s highway,
I’ll keep along the middle of the King’s highway;
I will not turn aside; whatever may betide,
I’ll keep along the middle of the King’s highway.

The meadows may be green, where bypath stile is seen,
Turn aside, the little flowers seem to say;
Be sure you take no heed—they’re trying to mislead—
Just keep along the middle of the King’s highway.

Refrain

For on enchanted ground, there’s danger all around,
And a thousand pleasant voices bid you stay,
With fingers stop your ears, and never mind the jeers,
Just keep along the middle of the King’s highway.

Refrain

Our God will guide us right, and walking in the light,
We shall win a crown of glory in the day,
When Jesus calls His own together round the throne,
Who keep along the middle of the King’s highway.

Refrainhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_k/the_kings_of_the_east_are_riding.php

The kings of the east are riding
Tonight to Bethlehem;
The sunset glows dividing,
The kings of the east are riding,
A star their journey guiding,
Gleaming with gold and gem.
The kings of the east are riding
Tonight to Bethlehem.

To a strange sweet song of Zion
The starry host troops forth:
The golden glaived Orion
To a strange sweet song of Zion,
The Archer and the Lion,
The watchers of the north:
To a strange sweet song of Zion
The starry host troops forth.

There beams above a manger
The child face of a star;
Amid the stars a stranger,
It beams above a manger,
What means this ether ranger
To pause where poor folk are?
There beams above a manger
The child face of a star.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/labor_on.php

                             In the harvest field there is work to do,
                             For the grain is ripe, and the reapers few;
                             And the Master’s voice bids the workers true
                             Heed the call that He gives today.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/laborer's_noon-day_hymn.php

                             Up to the throne of God is borne
                             The voice of praise at early morn,
                             And he accepts the punctual hymn
                             Sung as the light of day grows dim:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/laden_with_guilt_and_full_of_tears.php

                               Laden with guilt, and full of fears,
                               I fly to Thee, my Lord,
                               And not a glimpse of hope appears
                               But in Thy written Word.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lamb_goes_uncomplaining_forth.php

                               A Lamb goes uncomplaining forth,
                               The guilt of all men bearing;
                               And laden with the sins of earth,
                               None else the burden sharing!
                               Goes patient on, grow weak and faint,
                               To slaughter led without complaint,
                               That spotless life to offer;
                               Bears shame and stripes, and wounds and death,
                               Anguish and mockery, and saith,
                               “Willing all this I suffer."https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lamb_of_glory.php
Hear the story from God's Word that kingshttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lamb_of_god_i_look_to_thee.php
Lamb of God, I look to thee;
                         thou shalt my example be,
                         thou art gentle, meek and mild;
                         thou wast once a little child.

                         Lord, I would be as thou art;
                         give me thine obedient heart;
                         thou art pitiful and kind,
                         let me have thy loving mind.

                         Let me, above all, fulfill
                         God my heavenly Father's will;
                         never his good Spirit grieve;
                         only to his glory live.

                         Loving Jesus, gentle Lamb,
                         in thy gracious hands I am;
                         make me, Savior, what thou art,
                         like thyself within my heart.

                         I shall then show forth thy praise,
                         serve thee all my happy days;
                         then the world shall always see
                         Christ the holy Child in me.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lamb_of_god_pure_and_holy.php

                         1. Lamb of God, pure and holy,
                         Who on the cross didst suffer,
                         Ever patient and lowly,
                         Thyself to scorn didst offer.
                         All sins Thou borest for us,
                         Else had despair reigned o'er us:
                         Have mercy on us, 0 Jesus!
                         https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lamb_of_god_to_thee_we_raise.php
Lamb of God, to thee we raise
                         hymns of holy love and praise,
                         for the saint and prophet born
                         to be herald of the morn.

                         Like the morning star he rose
                         thine appearing to disclose,
                         like an ensign lifted high
                         he declared thy kingdom nigh.

                         Filled with grace and sanctity
                         from his blest nativity,
                         he, the new Elijah, came
                         bearing zeal's most sacred flame.

                         Kinsman of the King divine,
                         greatest of the prophet's line,
                         blest forerunner of the Lord,
                         who his praises can record?

                         Mighty preacher, by whose word
                         souls to penitence were stirred,
                         those who long in sin had strayed
                         then the call divine obeyed.

                         Make us, Lord, like him to be
                         fearless witnesses for thee,
                         faithful unto death be found,
                         and at last by thee be crowned.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lamb_of_god_we_fall_before_thee.php

        Lamb of God, we fall before Thee,
        Humbly trusting in Thy cross.
        That alone be all our glory;
        All things else are only dross.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lamb_of_god_whose_dying_love.php

            Lamb of God, whose dying love
            We now recall to mind,
            Send the answer from above,
            And let us mercy find;
            Think on us, who think on thee;
            And every struggling soul release:
            O remember Calvary,
            And bid us go in peace!

            By thine agonising pain
            And bloody sweat, we pray,
            By thy dying love to man,
            Take all our sins away;
            Burst our bonds, and set us free;
            From all iniquity release:
            O remember Calvary,
            And bid us go in peace!

            Lord, we would not hence depart,
            Till thou our wants relieve,
            Write forgiveness on our heart,
            And all thine image give.
            Still our souls shall cry to thee,
            Till perfected in holiness:
            O remember Calvary,
            And bid us go in peace!
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lamb_of_god_our_souls_adore_thee.php

                                 Lamb of God! Our souls adore Thee
                                 While upon Thy face we gaze;
                                 There the Father’s love and glory
                                 Shine in all their brightest rays;
                                 Thine almighty power and wisdom
                                 All creation’s works proclaim;
                                 Heaven and earth alike confess Thee
                                 As the ever great “I AM."https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lamb_of_god,_we_fall_before_thee.php

                                   Lamb of God, we fall before Thee,
                                   Humbly trusting in Thy cross.
                                   That alone be all our glory;
                                   All things else are only dross.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lambs_high_banquet_called_to_share.php

                                     The Lamb’s high banquet called to share,
                                     Arrayed in garments white and fair,
                                     The Red Sea past, we fain would sing
                                     To Jesus our triumphant King.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lambs_high_banquet_we_await.php

                                       The Lamb’s high banquet we await
                                       In snow white robes of royal state;
                                       And now, the Red Sea’s channel past,
                                       To Christ, our Prince, we sing at last.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lament.php

      I see mournful faces, I see long, hard looks
      Is the Christian happy as he reaches for books
      I see lonely people, I see poor and vain
      Can a Christian touch them, are we all to blame?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lamentation.php

                         O my God, save me
                         For the waters, they strangle me
                         I’m so tired of calling out
                         And my eyes of crying

                         Waiting so long for Your salvation
                         Must I suffer wrong
                         In hands of those who hate me?

                         Don’t leave me alone for I just have You
                         I have long endured attacks because of You

                         My face is all scarred, waiting so long
                         O my God, rescue me
                         I’m reduced to ashes
                         All my friends abandoned me

                         I am alone, they despise me
                         Don’t reject me in my old age
                         When my body fails in strength to serve You
                         In You I find refuge for I just have Youhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lamp_of_our_feet.php

                                         Lamp of our feet whereby we trace
                                         Our path when wont to stray;
                                         Stream from the fount of heav’nly 
                                         grace,
                                         Brook by the traveler’s way.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lamps_trimmed_and_burning.php

                                           Let your lamps be trimmed and 
                                           burning,
                                           Lest your feet may go astray!
                                           If you are the Lord’s disciple,
                                           Unto sinners show the way!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/land_of_our_birth.php
[Land of our birth, we pledge to thee
                         our love and toil in the years to be,
                         when we are grown and take our place
                         as men and women with our race.]

                         Father in heaven, who lovest all,
                         O help thy children when they call,
                         that they may build from age to age
                         an undefiled heritage.

                         Teach us to bear the yoke in youth,
                         with steadfastness and careful truth,
                         that, in our time, thy grace may give
                         the truth whereby the nations live.

                         Teach us to rule ourselves alway,
                         controlled and cleanly night and day,
                         that we may bring, if need arise,
                         no maimed or worthless sacrifice.

                         Teach us to look in all our ends,
                         on thee for Judge, and not our friends,
                         that we, with thee, may walk uncowed
                         by fear or favor of the crowd.

                         Teach us the strength that cannot seek,
                         by deed or thought, to hurt the weak,
                         that, under thee, we may possess
                         man's strength to comfort man's distress.

                         Teach us delight in simple things,
                         and mirth that has no bitter springs,
                         forgiveness free of evil done,
                         and love to all men 'neath the sun.

                         [Land of our birth, our faith, our pride,
                         for whose dear sake our fathers died;
                         O Motherland, we pledge to thee
                         head, heart and hand through the years to be.]https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/land_where_living_water_flows.php

      Some glad day my soul will fly way up high in the sky
      Far above this land of grief and woe
      With my Lord I'll fly away on that day, happy day
      To that land where living waters flowhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lands_that_long_in_darkenss_lay.php

                                             The lands that long in darkness lay
                                             Now have beheld a heav’nly light;
                                             Nations that sat in death’s cold 
                                             shade
                                             Are blessed with beams divinely 
                                             bright.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/last_night_my_lads.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/last_prayer.php

                                                 Father, I scarcely dare to 
                                                 pray,
                                                 So clear I see, now it is done,
                                                 How I have wasted half my day,
                                                 And left my work but just 
                                                 begun.
                                                 So clear I see that things I 
                                                 thought
                                                 Were right or harmless were a 
                                                 sin;
                                                 So clear I see that I have 
                                                 sought,
                                                 Unconscious, selfish aims to 
                                                 win.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/laud_o_zion_thy_salvation.php
Laud, O Zion, thy salvation,
                         laud with hymns of exultation
                         Christ, thy King and Shepherd true:
                         spend thyself, his honor raising,
                         who surpasseth all thy praising;
                         never canst thou reach his due.

                         Sing today, the mystery showing
                         of the living, life bestowing 
                         Bread from heaven before thee set;
                         e'en the same of old provided,
                         where the Twelve, divinely guided,
                         at the holy Table met.

                         Full and clear ring out thy chanting,
                         joy nor sweetest grace be wanting
                         to thy heart and soul today;
                         when we gather up the measure
                         of that Supper and its treasure,
                         keeping feast in glad array.

                         Lo, the new King's Table gracing, 
                         this new Passover of blessing
                         hath fulfilled the elder rite;
                         now the new the old effaceth,
                         truth revealed the shadow chaseth,
                         day is breaking the night.

                         What he did at Supper seated,
                         Christ ordained be repeated,
                         his memorial ne'er to cease:
                         and, his word for guidance taking,
                         bread and wine we hallow, making
                         thus our sacrifice of peace.

                         This the truth to Christians given:
                         Bread becomes his Flesh from heaven,
                         Wine becomes his holy Blood.
                         Doth it pass thy comprehending?
                         Yet by faith, thy sight transcending,
                         wondrous things are understood.

                         Yea, beneath these signs are bidden
                         glorious things to sight forbidden:
                         look not on the outward sign.
                         Wine is poured and Bread is broken.
                         but in either sacred token
                         Christ is here by power divine.

                         Whoso of this Food partaketh,
                         rendeth not the Lord nor breaketh:
                         Christ is whole to all that taste.
                         Thousands are, as one, receivers,
                         one, as thousands of believers,
                         takes the Food that cannot waste.

                         Good and evil men are sharing
                         one repast, a doom preparing
                         varied as the heart of man;
                         doom of life or death awarded,
                         as their days shall be recorded
                         which from one beginning ran.

                         When the Sacrament is broken, 
                         doubt not in each severed token,
                         hallowed by the word once spoken,
                         resteth all the true content:
                         nought the precious Gift divideth,
                         breaking but the sign betideth,
                         he himself the same abideth,
                         nothing of his fullness spent.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/laurels_fresh_laurels.php

                                                   Laurels, fresh laurels, for 
                                                   the Sunday School we bring;
                                                   They will bloom in fadeless 
                                                   verdure
                                                   Through a calm eternal 
                                                   spring;
                                                   Then gladly hail with a pure 
                                                   delight,
                                                   Oh, hail our beautiful wreath 
                                                   so bright;
                                                   Laurels, “Fresh Laurels," for 
                                                   the Sunday School, for the 
                                                   Sunday School,
                                                   Laurels, “Fresh Laurels," for 
                                                   the Sunday School we bring.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lavish_love_abundant_beauty.php

          Lavish love, abundant beauty, gracious gifts for heart and hand,
          Life that fills the soul and senses--all burst forth at Your command.
          Lord, our Lord, Eternal Father, Great Creator, God and Friend,
          Boundless pow'r gave full expression to Your love which knows no end.

https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/law_comands_and_makes_us_know.php

                                                     The Law commands and makes 
                                                     us know
                                                     What duties to our God we 
                                                     owe;
                                                     But ’tis the Gospel must 
                                                     reveal
                                                     Where lies our strength to 
                                                     do His will.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/law_of_god_is_good_and_wise.php

                                                       The law of God is good 
                                                       and wise,
                                                       And sets His will before 
                                                       our eyes,
                                                       Shows us the way of 
                                                       righteousness,
                                                       And dooms to death when 
                                                       we transgress.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lay_down.php

      It's a cold, cold world, that we're walking through,
      Lay down the burden of your heart.
      But it's warm as toast, walking two by two,
      Lay down the burden of your heart.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lay_it_down.php

                                                         Oh, come, sinner, come! 
                                                         ’tis mercy’s call;
                                                         Here at Jesus’ feet!
                                                         Oh come, and, 
                                                         repenting, lay thy all
                                                         Down at Jesus’ feet!https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lead_kindly_light.php
Lead kindly light, amid the encircling gloom,
                Lead though me on
                The night is dark and I am far from home
                Lead thou me on.
                Keep thou my feet, I do not ask to see
                The distant scene one step enough for me
                I was not ever thus, nor prayed that thou
                Should'st lead me on.
                I loved to choose and see my path but now,
                Lead Thou me on.
                I loved the garish day, and spite of fears
                Pride ruled my will, remember not past years
                So long Thy powers has blest me,
                Sure it still will lead me on.
                O'er moon and fern, o'er crag and torrent, and till the night is 
                gone,
                And with the morn those angel faces smile.
                Which I have loved long since, and lost awhile.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lead_kindly_light.php
Lead kindly light, amid the encircling gloom,
                Lead though me on
                The night is dark and I am far from home
                Lead thou me on.
                Keep thou my feet, I do not ask to see
                The distant scene one step enough for me
                I was not ever thus, nor prayed that thou
                Should'st lead me on.
                I loved to choose and see my path but now,
                Lead Thou me on.
                I loved the garish day, and spite of fears
                Pride ruled my will, remember not past years
                So long Thy powers has blest me,
                Sure it still will lead me on.
                O'er moon and fern, o'er crag and torrent, and till the night is 
                gone,
                And with the morn those angel faces smile.
                Which I have loved long since, and lost awhile.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lead_me_gently_home.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lead_me_gently_home_father.php

                                                             Lead me gently 
                                                             home, Father,
                                                             Lead me gently 
                                                             home,
                                                             When life’s toils 
                                                             are ended
                                                             And parting days 
                                                             have come;
                                                             Sin no more shall 
                                                             tempt me,
                                                             Ne’er from Thee 
                                                             I’ll roam,
                                                             If Thou’lt only 
                                                             lead me, Father,
                                                             Lead me gently 
                                                             home.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lead_me_higher.php

                                                               Jesus, lead me up 
                                                               the mountain,
                                                               Where the whitest 
                                                               robes are seen,
                                                               Where the saints 
                                                               can see the 
                                                               fountain,
                                                               Where the pure 
                                                               are keeping 
                                                               clean.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lead_me_lord.php
Lead me lord, lead me lord!
                By the light of truth
                To seek and to find the narrow way…
                Be my way, be my truth, be my light O lord!
                And lead me Lord today…https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lead_me_on_to_them.php

                                                                     Lead them, 
                                                                     my God, to 
                                                                     Thee,
                                                                     Lead them 
                                                                     to Thee,
                                                                     These 
                                                                     children 
                                                                     dear of 
                                                                     mine,
                                                                     Thou gavest 
                                                                     me.
                                                                     O, by Thy 
                                                                     love 
                                                                     divine,https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lead_me_to_calvary.php

                                                                 King of my 
                                                                 life, I crown 
                                                                 Thee now,
                                                                 Thine shall the 
                                                                 glory be;
                                                                 Lest I forget 
                                                                 Thy thorn 
                                                                 crowned brow,
                                                                 Lead me to 
                                                                 Calvary.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lead_me_to_rest.php

      I was hurting all alone
      And I was searching for a comfort I could find on my own
      With no direction, feeling down
      My life was heading for disaster 'til you turned me around
      Nothing ever had been able to ease me
      When trying to please me
      It only pleased me less
      But when I learned about the way that you loved me
      Had to put your honor above me
      And you gave me rest
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lead_me_to_the_rock.php

      Oh sometimes the shadows are deep
      And rough seems the path to the goal
      And sorrows sometimes how they sweep
      Like tempests and over the soul
      Oh then to the rock let me fly (let me fly)
      To the rock that is higher than I (higher than I)
      Oh then to the rock let me fly (let me fly)
      To the rock that is higher than Ihttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lead_me_to_the_rock.php

      Oh sometimes the shadows are deep
      And rough seems the path to the goal
      And sorrows sometimes how they sweep
      Like tempests and over the soul
      Oh then to the rock let me fly (let me fly)
      To the rock that is higher than I (higher than I)
      Oh then to the rock let me fly (let me fly)
      To the rock that is higher than Ihttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lead_on_o_king_eternal.php

                                                                   Lead on, O 
                                                                   King eternal,
                                                                   The day of 
                                                                   march has 
                                                                   come;
                                                                   Henceforth in 
                                                                   fields of 
                                                                   conquest
                                                                   Thy tents 
                                                                   shall be our 
                                                                   home.
                                                                   Through days 
                                                                   of 
                                                                   preparation
                                                                   Thy grace has 
                                                                   made us 
                                                                   strong;
                                                                   And now, O 
                                                                   King eternal,
                                                                   We lift our 
                                                                   battle song.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lead_them_to_me.php

                                                                     Lead them, 
                                                                     my God, to 
                                                                     Thee,
                                                                     Lead them 
                                                                     to Thee,
                                                                     These 
                                                                     children 
                                                                     dear of 
                                                                     mine,
                                                                     Thou gavest 
                                                                     me.
                                                                     O, by Thy 
                                                                     love 
                                                                     divine,https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lead_us_heavenly_father.php

        Lead us, heavenly Father,
        In our opening way,
        Lead us in the morning
        Of our little day.
        While our hearts are happy,
        While our souls are free,
        May we give our childhood
        As a song to Thee.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lead_us_on.php

                                                                           Step 
                                                                           by 
                                                                           step, 
                                                                           O 
                                                                           loving 
                                                                           Savior,
                                                                           In 
                                                                           Thine 
                                                                           own 
                                                                           appointed 
                                                                           way,
                                                                           In 
                                                                           the 
                                                                           path 
                                                                           which 
                                                                           Thou 
                                                                           hast 
                                                                           chosen,
                                                                           Lead 
                                                                           us 
                                                                           on, 
                                                                           from 
                                                                           day 
                                                                           to 
                                                                           day.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lead_us_heavenly_father.php

        Lead us, heavenly Father,
        In our opening way,
        Lead us in the morning
        Of our little day.
        While our hearts are happy,
        While our souls are free,
        May we give our childhood
        As a song to Thee.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lead_us_o_father.php

                                                                         Lead 
                                                                         us, O 
                                                                         Father, 
                                                                         in the 
                                                                         paths 
                                                                         of 
                                                                         peace:
                                                                         Without 
                                                                         Thy 
                                                                         guiding 
                                                                         hand we 
                                                                         go 
                                                                         astray,
                                                                         And 
                                                                         doubts 
                                                                         appall, 
                                                                         and 
                                                                         sorrows 
                                                                         still 
                                                                         increase;
                                                                         Lead us 
                                                                         through 
                                                                         Christ, 
                                                                         the 
                                                                         true 
                                                                         and 
                                                                         living 
                                                                         way.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/leader_of_faithful_souls.php

            Leader of faithful souls, and guide
            Of all that travel to the sky,
            Come and with us, ev'n us, abide,
            Who would on thee alone rely,
            On thee alone our spirits stay,
            While held in life's uneven way.

            We've no abiding city here,
            But seek a city out of sight;
            Thither our steady course we steer,
            Aspiring to the plains of light,
            Jerusalem, the saints' abode,
            Whose founder is the living God.

            Through thee, who all our sins hast borne,
            Freely and graciously forgiven,
            With songs to Zion we return,
            Contending for our native heaven;
            That palace of our glorious King,
            We find it nearer while we sing.

            Raised by the breath of love divine,
            We urge our way with strength renewed;
            The church of the first-born to join,
            We travel to the mount of God,
            With joy upon our heads arise,
            And meet our Captain in the skies.
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/lean_on_his_arms.php

                                                                             Just 
                                                                             lean 
                                                                             upon 
                                                                             the 
                                                                             arms 
                                                                             of 
                                                                             Jesus,
                                                                             He’ll 
                                                                             help 
                                                                             you 
                                                                             along, 
                                                                             help 
                                                                             you 
                                                                             along,
                                                                             If 
                                                                             you 
                                                                             will 
                                                                             trust 
                                                                             His 
                                                                             love 
                                                                             unfailing,
                                                                             He’ll 
                                                                             fill 
                                                                             your 
                                                                             heart 
                                                                             with 
                                                                             song.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/leaning_on_the_arms_of_jesus.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/leaning_on_the_everlasting_arms.php

                                                                               What 
                                                                               a 
                                                                               fellowship, 
                                                                               what 
                                                                               a 
                                                                               joy 
                                                                               divine,
                                                                               Leaning 
                                                                               on 
                                                                               the 
                                                                               everlasting 
                                                                               arms;
                                                                               What 
                                                                               a 
                                                                               blessedness, 
                                                                               what 
                                                                               a 
                                                                               peace 
                                                                               is 
                                                                               mine,
                                                                               Leaning 
                                                                               on 
                                                                               the 
                                                                               everlasting 
                                                                               arms.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/learning_of_my_savior.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/leave_it_all_to_him.php

      If you're alone and oh so lonely
      And you don't know what to do
      Jesus will bear your heavy load
      He'll give you relief from your burden
      He'll give you rest for your soul
      So just leave it all to Himhttps://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/leave_it_there.php

                                                                               If 
                                                                               the 
                                                                               world 
                                                                               from 
                                                                               you 
                                                                               withhold 
                                                                               of 
                                                                               its 
                                                                               silver 
                                                                               and 
                                                                               its 
                                                                               gold,
                                                                               And 
                                                                               you 
                                                                               have 
                                                                               to 
                                                                               get 
                                                                               along 
                                                                               with 
                                                                               meager 
                                                                               fare,
                                                                               Just 
                                                                               remember, 
                                                                               in 
                                                                               His 
                                                                               Word, 
                                                                               how 
                                                                               He 
                                                                               feeds 
                                                                               the 
                                                                               little 
                                                                               bird;
                                                                               Take 
                                                                               your 
                                                                               burden 
                                                                               to 
                                                                               the 
                                                                               Lord 
                                                                               and 
                                                                               leave 
                                                                               it 
                                                                               there.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/leave_shepherds_leave_your_peaceful_flocks.php

                                                                                 Leave, shepherds, leave your peaceful flocks agrazing!
                                                                                 No longer grieve, but come, O come away!
                                                                                 Come and adore, your tears all changed to praising;
                                                                                 Of Him the heav’nly King, O sing, O sing
                                                                                 Your Savior born this happy day.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/leaves_or_sheaves.php
Refrain:https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/leaving_all_to_follow_jesus.php

                                                                                   Leaving all to follow Jesus,
                                                                                   Turning from the world away,
                                                                                   Stepping out upon the promise,
                                                                                   All I have is His today.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/leaving_it_all_with_jesus.php

                                                                                     My heart has come to the place of rest,
                                                                                     Leaving it all with Jesus;
                                                                                     The fear of death doth no more molest,
                                                                                     I知 leaving it all with Jesus.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/leaving_smiles.php

                                                                                     In the light that Jesus sheds on you,
                                                                                     Thro’ many blessings day by day,
                                                                                     You can be His servant kind and true,
                                                                                     By leaving smiles along your way.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/legalistic_tendencies.php

      Their eyes are closed, they cannot see (Eyes are closed, they cannot see)
      Their legalistic tendencies (Legalistic tendencies)
      Their eyes are closed, they cannot see (Eyes are closed, they cannot see)
      Their legalistic tendencies (Legalistic tendencies)
      https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/let_all_creation_bless_the_lord.php
Let all creation bless the Lord,
                         till heaven with praise is ringing.
                         Sun, moon, and stars, peal out a chord,
                         stir up the angels' singing.
                         Sing, wind and rain! Sing, snow and sleet!
                         Make music, day, night, cold, and heat:
                         exalt the God who made you.

                         All living things upon this earth,
                         green fertile hills and mountains,
                         sing to the God who gave you birth;
                         be joyful, springs and fountains.
                         Lithe waterlife, bright airborne birds,
                         wild roving beasts, tame flocks and herds:
                         exalt the God who made you.

                         O men and women everywhere,
                         lift up a hymn of glory;
                         all you who know God's steadfast care,
                         tell our salvation's story.
                         No tongue be silent; sing your part,
                         you humble souls and meek of heart:
                         exalt the God who made you.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/let_all_mortal_flesh_keep_silence.php

                                                                                     Let all mortal flesh keep silence,
                                                                                     And with fear and trembling stand;
                                                                                     Ponder nothing earthly minded,
                                                                                     For with blessing in His hand,
                                                                                     Christ our God to earth descendeth,
                                                                                     Our full homage to demand.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/let_all_on_earth_their_voices_raise.php

                                                                                       Let all on earth their voices raise,
                                                                                       Re-echoing Heav’n’s triumphant praise
                                                                                       To Him, Who gave th’apostles grace
                                                                                       To run on earth their glorious race.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/let_all_that_breathe_jehovah_praise.php

        Let all that breathe Jehovah praise;
        Almighty, all-creating Lord!
        Let earth and Heav’n His power confess,
        Brought out of nothing by His word.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/let_all_the_earth_their_voices_raise.php

                                                                                         Let all the earth their voices raise
                                                                                         To sing the choicest psalm of praise,
                                                                                         To sing and bless Jehovah’s Name:
                                                                                         His glory let the heathens know,
                                                                                         His wonders to the nations show,
                                                                                         And all His saving works proclaim.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/let_all_the_multitudes_of_light.php

            Let all the multitudes of light,
            Their songs in concert raising,
            With earth's triumphal hymns unite,
            The risen Saviour praising.
            Ye heavens, his festival proclaim!
            Our King returneth whence he came,
            With victory amazing.

            For us he bore the bitter Tree,
            To death's dark realm descending;
            Our foe he slew, and set us free,
            Man's ancient bondage ending.
            No more the tyrant's chains oppress;
            O conquering Love, thy name we bless,
            With thee to heaven ascending.

            Jesus, to thee be endless praise,
            For this thy great salvation;
            O holy Father, thine always
            Be thanks and adoration;
            Spirit of life and light, to thee
            Eternal praise and glory be:
            One God of all creation!
 https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/let_all_things_now_living.php
Let all things now 
                         living a song of thanksgiving
                         To God the creator triumphantly raise.
                         Who fashioned and made us, protected and stayed us,
                         Who still guides us on to the end of our days.
                         God's banners are o'er us, His light goes before us,
                         A pillar of fire shining forth in the night.
                         Till shadows have vanished and darkness is banished
                         As forward we travel from light into light.

                         His law he enforces, the stars in their courses
                         And sun in its orbit obediently shine;
                         The hills and the mountains, the rivers and fountains,
                         The deeps of the ocean proclaim him divine.
                         We too should be voicing our love and rejoicing;
                         With glad adoration a Song let us raise
                         Till all things now living unite in thanksgiving:
                         "To God in the highest, Hosanna and praise!"https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/let_angels_and_archangels_sing.php

                                                                                             Let angels and archangels sing
                                                                                             The wonderful Immanuel’s Name,
                                                                                             Adore with us our new-born King,
                                                                                             And still the joyful news proclaim;
                                                                                             All earth and Heav’n be ever joined
                                                                                             To praise the Savior of mankind.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/let_children_hear_the_mighty_deeds.php

                                                                                               Let children hear the mighty deeds
                                                                                               Which God performed of old;
                                                                                               Which in our younger years we saw,
                                                                                               And which our fathers told.https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/let_christian_faith_and_hope_dispel.php

                                                                                                 Let Christian faith and hope dispel
                                                                                                 The fears of guilt and woe;
                                                                                                 The Lord Almighty is our Friend,
                                                                                                 And who can prove a foe?https://www.hymnlyrics.org/newlyrics_l/let_death_dissolve_my_body_now.php

                         Let death dissolve my body now,
                         And bear my spirit home;
                         Why do my days move on so slow,
                         Nor my salvation come?

                         God has laid up in heav'n for me
                         A crown which can not fade;
                         The righteous Judge, at that great day
                         Shall place it on my head.

                         Jesus the Lord, shall guard me safe
                         From ev'ry ill design;
                         And to his heav'nly kingdom take
                         This feeble soul of mine.

                         God is my everlasting aid,
                         My portion, and my fiend;
                         To him be highest glory paid
                         In ages without end.