Thy bosom is endeared with all hearts,	1
Which I by lacking have supposed dead,	1
And there reigns love and all love's loving parts,	1
And all those friends which I thought buried.	1
How many a holy and obsequious tear	1
Hath dear religious love stol'n from mine eye	1
As interest of the dead, which now appear	1
But things removed that hidden in thee lie!	1
Thou art the grave where buried love doth live,	1
Hung with the trophies of my lovers gone,	1
Who all their parts of me to thee did give;	1
That due of many now is thine alone:	1
Their images I loved I view in thee,	1
And thou, all they, hast all the all of me.	1

If thou survive my well-contented day,	1
When that churl Death my bones with dust shall cover,	1
And shalt by fortune once more re-survey	1
These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover,	1
Compare them with the bettering of the time,	1
And though they be outstripp'd by every pen,	1
Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme,	1
Exceeded by the height of happier men.	1
O, then vouchsafe me but this loving thought:	1
'Had my friend's Muse grown with this growing age,	1
A dearer birth than this his love had brought,	1
To march in ranks of better equipage:	1
But since he died and poets better prove,	1
Theirs for their style I'll read, his for his love.'	1

Full many a glorious morning have I seen	1
Flatter the mountain-tops with sovereign eye,	1
Kissing with golden face the meadows green,	1
Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy;	1
Anon permit the basest clouds to ride	1
With ugly rack on his celestial face,	1
And from the forlorn world his visage hide,	1
Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace:	1
Even so my sun one early morn did shine	1
With all triumphant splendor on my brow;	1
But out, alack! he was but one hour mine;	1
The region cloud hath mask'd him from me now.	1
Yet him for this my love no whit disdaineth;	1
Suns of the world may stain when heaven's sun staineth.	1

Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day,	1
And make me travel forth without my cloak,	1
To let base clouds o'ertake me in my way,	1
Hiding thy bravery in their rotten smoke?	1
'Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break,	1
To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face,	1
For no man well of such a salve can speak	1
That heals the wound and cures not the disgrace:	1
Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief;	1
Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss:	1
The offender's sorrow lends but weak relief	1
To him that bears the strong offence's cross.	1
Ah! but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds,	1
And they are rich and ransom all ill deeds.	1

No more be grieved at that which thou hast done:	1
Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud;	1
Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun,	1
And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud.	1
All men make faults, and even I in this,	1
Authorizing thy trespass with compare,	1
Myself corrupting, salving thy amiss,	1
Excusing thy sins more than thy sins are;	1
For to thy sensual fault I bring in sense--	1
Thy adverse party is thy advocate--	1
And 'gainst myself a lawful plea commence:	1
Such civil war is in my love and hate	1
That I an accessary needs must be	1
To that sweet thief which sourly robs from me.	1

Let me confess that we two must be twain,	1
Although our undivided loves are one:	1
So shall those blots that do with me remain	1
Without thy help by me be borne alone.	1
In our two loves there is but one respect,	1
Though in our lives a separable spite,	1
Which though it alter not love's sole effect,	1
Yet doth it steal sweet hours from love's delight.	1
I may not evermore acknowledge thee,	1
Lest my bewailed guilt should do thee shame,	1
Nor thou with public kindness honour me,	1
Unless thou take that honour from thy name:	1
But do not so; I love thee in such sort	1
As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report.	1

As a decrepit father takes delight	1
To see his active child do deeds of youth,	1
So I, made lame by fortune's dearest spite,	1
Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth.	1
For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit,	1
Or any of these all, or all, or more,	1
Entitled in thy parts do crowned sit,	1
I make my love engrafted to this store:	1
So then I am not lame, poor, nor despised,	1
Whilst that this shadow doth such substance give	1
That I in thy abundance am sufficed	1
And by a part of all thy glory live.	1
Look, what is best, that best I wish in thee:	1
This wish I have; then ten times happy me!	1

How can my Muse want subject to invent,	1
While thou dost breathe, that pour'st into my verse	1
Thine own sweet argument, too excellent	1
For every vulgar paper to rehearse?	1
O, give thyself the thanks, if aught in me	1
Worthy perusal stand against thy sight;	1
For who's so dumb that cannot write to thee,	1
When thou thyself dost give invention light?	1
Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth	1
Than those old nine which rhymers invocate;	1
And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth	1
Eternal numbers to outlive long date.	1
If my slight Muse do please these curious days,	1
The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise.	1

O, how thy worth with manners may I sing,	1
When thou art all the better part of me?	1
What can mine own praise to mine own self bring?	1
And what is 't but mine own when I praise thee?	1
Even for this let us divided live,	1
And our dear love lose name of single one,	1
That by this separation I may give	1
That due to thee which thou deservest alone.	1
O absence, what a torment wouldst thou prove,	1
Were it not thy sour leisure gave sweet leave	1
To entertain the time with thoughts of love,	1
Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive,	1
And that thou teachest how to make one twain,	1
By praising him here who doth hence remain!	1

Take all my loves, my love, yea, take them all;	1
What hast thou then more than thou hadst before?	1
No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call;	1
All mine was thine before thou hadst this more.	1
Then if for my love thou my love receivest,	1
I cannot blame thee for my love thou usest;	1
But yet be blamed, if thou thyself deceivest	1
By wilful taste of what thyself refusest.	1
I do forgive thy robbery, gentle thief,	1
Although thou steal thee all my poverty;	1
And yet, love knows, it is a greater grief	1
To bear love's wrong than hate's known injury.	1
Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows,	1
Kill me with spites; yet we must not be foes.	1

Those petty wrongs that liberty commits,	1
When I am sometime absent from thy heart,	1
Thy beauty and thy years full well befits,	1
For still temptation follows where thou art.	1
Gentle thou art and therefore to be won,	1
Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assailed;	1
And when a woman woos, what woman's son	1
Will sourly leave her till she have prevailed?	1
Ay me! but yet thou mightest my seat forbear,	1
And chide try beauty and thy straying youth,	1
Who lead thee in their riot even there	1
Where thou art forced to break a twofold truth,	1
Hers by thy beauty tempting her to thee,	1
Thine, by thy beauty being false to me.	1

That thou hast her, it is not all my grief,	1
And yet it may be said I loved her dearly;	1
That she hath thee, is of my wailing chief,	1
A loss in love that touches me more nearly.	1
Loving offenders, thus I will excuse ye:	1
Thou dost love her, because thou knowst I love her;	1
And for my sake even so doth she abuse me,	1
Suffering my friend for my sake to approve her.	1
If I lose thee, my loss is my love's gain,	1
And losing her, my friend hath found that loss;	1
Both find each other, and I lose both twain,	1
And both for my sake lay on me this cross:	1
But here's the joy; my friend and I are one;	1
Sweet flattery! then she loves but me alone.	1

When most I wink, then do mine eyes best see,	1
For all the day they view things unrespected;	1
But when I sleep, in dreams they look on thee,	1
And darkly bright are bright in dark directed.	1
Then thou, whose shadow shadows doth make bright,	1
How would thy shadow's form form happy show	1
To the clear day with thy much clearer light,	1
When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so!	1
How would, I say, mine eyes be blessed made	1
By looking on thee in the living day,	1
When in dead night thy fair imperfect shade	1
Through heavy sleep on sightless eyes doth stay!	1
All days are nights to see till I see thee,	1
And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me.	1

If the dull substance of my flesh were thought,	1
Injurious distance should not stop my way;	1
For then despite of space I would be brought,	1
From limits far remote where thou dost stay.	1
No matter then although my foot did stand	1
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee;	1
For nimble thought can jump both sea and land	1
As soon as think the place where he would be.	1
But ah! thought kills me that I am not thought,	1
To leap large lengths of miles when thou art gone,	1
But that so much of earth and water wrought	1
I must attend time's leisure with my moan,	1
Receiving nought by elements so slow	1
But heavy tears, badges of either's woe.	1

The other two, slight air and purging fire,	1
Are both with thee, wherever I abide;	1
The first my thought, the other my desire,	1
These present-absent with swift motion slide.	1
For when these quicker elements are gone	1
In tender embassy of love to thee,	1
My life, being made of four, with two alone	1
Sinks down to death, oppress'd with melancholy;	1
Until life's composition be recured	1
By those swift messengers return'd from thee,	1
Who even but now come back again, assured	1
Of thy fair health, recounting it to me:	1
This told, I joy; but then no longer glad,	1
I send them back again and straight grow sad.	1

Mine eye and heart are at a mortal war	1
How to divide the conquest of thy sight;	1
Mine eye my heart thy picture's sight would bar,	1
My heart mine eye the freedom of that right.	1
My heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie--	1
A closet never pierced with crystal eyes--	1
But the defendant doth that plea deny	1
And says in him thy fair appearance lies.	1
To 'cide this title is impanneled	1
A quest of thoughts, all tenants to the heart,	1
And by their verdict is determined	1
The clear eye's moiety and the dear heart's part:	1
As thus; mine eye's due is thy outward part,	1
And my heart's right thy inward love of heart.	1

Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is took,	1
And each doth good turns now unto the other:	1
When that mine eye is famish'd for a look,	1
Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother,	1
With my love's picture then my eye doth feast	1
And to the painted banquet bids my heart;	1
Another time mine eye is my heart's guest	1
And in his thoughts of love doth share a part:	1
So, either by thy picture or my love,	1
Thyself away art resent still with me;	1
For thou not farther than my thoughts canst move,	1
And I am still with them and they with thee;	1
Or, if they sleep, thy picture in my sight	1
Awakes my heart to heart's and eye's delight.	1

How careful was I, when I took my way,	1
Each trifle under truest bars to thrust,	1
That to my use it might unused stay	1
From hands of falsehood, in sure wards of trust!	1
But thou, to whom my jewels trifles are,	1
Most worthy of comfort, now my greatest grief,	1
Thou, best of dearest and mine only care,	1
Art left the prey of every vulgar thief.	1
Thee have I not lock'd up in any chest,	1
Save where thou art not, though I feel thou art,	1
Within the gentle closure of my breast,	1
From whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part;	1
And even thence thou wilt be stol'n, I fear,	1
For truth proves thievish for a prize so dear.	1

Against that time, if ever that time come,	1
When I shall see thee frown on my defects,	1
When as thy love hath cast his utmost sum,	1
Call'd to that audit by advised respects;	1
Against that time when thou shalt strangely pass	1
And scarcely greet me with that sun thine eye,	1
When love, converted from the thing it was,	1
Shall reasons find of settled gravity,--	1
Against that time do I ensconce me here	1
Within the knowledge of mine own desert,	1
And this my hand against myself uprear,	1
To guard the lawful reasons on thy part:	1
To leave poor me thou hast the strength of laws,	1
Since why to love I can allege no cause.	1

How heavy do I journey on the way,	1
When what I seek, my weary travel's end,	1
Doth teach that ease and that repose to say	1
'Thus far the miles are measured from thy friend!'	1
The beast that bears me, tired with my woe,	1
Plods dully on, to bear that weight in me,	1
As if by some instinct the wretch did know	1
His rider loved not speed, being made from thee:	1
The bloody spur cannot provoke him on	1
That sometimes anger thrusts into his hide;	1
Which heavily he answers with a groan,	1
More sharp to me than spurring to his side;	1
For that same groan doth put this in my mind;	1
My grief lies onward and my joy behind.	1

Thus can my love excuse the slow offence	1
Of my dull bearer when from thee I speed:	1
From where thou art why should I haste me thence?	1
Till I return, of posting is no need.	1
O, what excuse will my poor beast then find,	1
When swift extremity can seem but slow?	1
Then should I spur, though mounted on the wind;	1
In winged speed no motion shall I know:	1
Then can no horse with my desire keep pace;	1
Therefore desire of perfect'st love being made,	1
Shall neigh--no dull flesh--in his fiery race;	1
But love, for love, thus shall excuse my jade;	1
Since from thee going he went wilful-slow,	1
Towards thee I'll run, and give him leave to go.	1

So am I as the rich, whose blessed key	1
Can bring him to his sweet up-locked treasure,	1
The which he will not every hour survey,	1
For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure.	1
Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare,	1
Since, seldom coming, in the long year set,	1
Like stones of worth they thinly placed are,	1
Or captain jewels in the carcanet.	1
So is the time that keeps you as my chest,	1
Or as the wardrobe which the robe doth hide,	1
To make some special instant special blest,	1
By new unfolding his imprison'd pride.	1
Blessed are you, whose worthiness gives scope,	1
Being had, to triumph, being lack'd, to hope.	1

What is your substance, whereof are you made,	1
That millions of strange shadows on you tend?	1
Since every one hath, every one, one shade,	1
And you, but one, can every shadow lend.	1
Describe Adonis, and the counterfeit	1
Is poorly imitated after you;	1
On Helen's cheek all art of beauty set,	1
And you in Grecian tires are painted new:	1
Speak of the spring and foison of the year;	1
The one doth shadow of your beauty show,	1
The other as your bounty doth appear;	1
And you in every blessed shape we know.	1
In all external grace you have some part,	1
But you like none, none you, for constant heart.	1

O, how much more doth beauty beauteous seem	1
By that sweet ornament which truth doth give!	1
The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem	1
For that sweet odour which doth in it live.	1
The canker-blooms have full as deep a dye	1
As the perfumed tincture of the roses,	1
Hang on such thorns and play as wantonly	1
When summer's breath their masked buds discloses:	1
But, for their virtue only is their show,	1
They live unwoo'd and unrespected fade,	1
Die to themselves. Sweet roses do not so;	1
Of their sweet deaths are sweetest odours made:	1
And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth,	1
When that shall fade, my verse distills your truth.	1

Not marble, nor the gilded monuments	1
Of princes, shall outlive this powerful rhyme;	1
But you shall shine more bright in these contents	1
Than unswept stone besmear'd with sluttish time.	1
When wasteful war shall statues overturn,	1
And broils root out the work of masonry,	1
Nor Mars his sword nor war's quick fire shall burn	1
The living record of your memory.	1
'Gainst death and all-oblivious enmity	1
Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room	1
Even in the eyes of all posterity	1
That wear this world out to the ending doom.	1
So, till the judgment that yourself arise,	1
You live in this, and dwell in lover's eyes.	1

Sweet love, renew thy force; be it not said	1
Thy edge should blunter be than appetite,	1
Which but to-day by feeding is allay'd,	1
To-morrow sharpen'd in his former might:	1
So, love, be thou; although to-day thou fill	1
Thy hungry eyes even till they wink with fullness,	1
To-morrow see again, and do not kill	1
The spirit of love with a perpetual dullness.	1
Let this sad interim like the ocean be	1
Which parts the shore, where two contracted new	1
Come daily to the banks, that, when they see	1
Return of love, more blest may be the view;	1
Else call it winter, which being full of care	1
Makes summer's welcome thrice more wish'd, more rare.	1

Being your slave, what should I do but tend	1
Upon the hours and times of your desire?	1
I have no precious time at all to spend,	1
Nor services to do, till you require.	1
Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour	1
Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you,	1
Nor think the bitterness of absence sour	1
When you have bid your servant once adieu;	1
Nor dare I question with my jealous thought	1
Where you may be, or your affairs suppose,	1
But, like a sad slave, stay and think of nought	1
Save, where you are how happy you make those.	1
So true a fool is love that in your will,	1
Though you do any thing, he thinks no ill.	1

That god forbid that made me first your slave,	1
I should in thought control your times of pleasure,	1
Or at your hand the account of hours to crave,	1
Being your vassal, bound to stay your leisure!	1
O, let me suffer, being at your beck,	1
The imprison'd absence of your liberty;	1
And patience, tame to sufferance, bide each cheque,	1
Without accusing you of injury.	1
Be where you list, your charter is so strong	1
That you yourself may privilege your time	1
To what you will; to you it doth belong	1
Yourself to pardon of self-doing crime.	1
I am to wait, though waiting so be hell;	1
Not blame your pleasure, be it ill or well.	1

If there be nothing new, but that which is	1
Hath been before, how are our brains beguiled,	1
Which, labouring for invention, bear amiss	1
The second burden of a former child!	1
O, that record could with a backward look,	1
Even of five hundred courses of the sun,	1
Show me your image in some antique book,	1
Since mind at first in character was done!	1
That I might see what the old world could say	1
To this composed wonder of your frame;	1
Whether we are mended, or whether better they,	1
Or whether revolution be the same.	1
O, sure I am, the wits of former days	1
To subjects worse have given admiring praise.	1

Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore,	1
So do our minutes hasten to their end;	1
Each changing place with that which goes before,	1
In sequent toil all forwards do contend.	1
Nativity, once in the main of light,	1
Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crown'd,	1
Crooked elipses 'gainst his glory fight,	1
And Time that gave doth now his gift confound.	1
Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth	1
And delves the parallels in beauty's brow,	1
Feeds on the rarities of nature's truth,	1
And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow:	1
And yet to times in hope my verse shall stand,	1
Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand.	1

Is it thy will thy image should keep open	1
My heavy eyelids to the weary night?	1
Dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken,	1
While shadows like to thee do mock my sight?	1
Is it thy spirit that thou send'st from thee	1
So far from home into my deeds to pry,	1
To find out shames and idle hours in me,	1
The scope and tenor of thy jealousy?	1
O, no! thy love, though much, is not so great:	1
It is my love that keeps mine eye awake;	1
Mine own true love that doth my rest defeat,	1
To play the watchman ever for thy sake:	1
For thee watch I whilst thou dost wake elsewhere,	1
From me far off, with others all too near.	1

Sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye	1
And all my soul and all my every part;	1
And for this sin there is no remedy,	1
It is so grounded inward in my heart.	1
Methinks no face so gracious is as mine,	1
No shape so true, no truth of such account;	1
And for myself mine own worth do define,	1
As I all other in all worths surmount.	1
But when my glass shows me myself indeed,	1
Beated and chopp'd with tann'd antiquity,	1
Mine own self-love quite contrary I read;	1
Self so self-loving were iniquity.	1
'Tis thee, myself, that for myself I praise,	1
Painting my age with beauty of thy days.	1

Against my love shall be, as I am now,	1
With Time's injurious hand crush'd and o'er-worn;	1
When hours have drain'd his blood and fill'd his brow	1
With lines and wrinkles; when his youthful morn	1
Hath travell'd on to age's steepy night,	1
And all those beauties whereof now he's king	1
Are vanishing or vanish'd out of sight,	1
Stealing away the treasure of his spring;	1
For such a time do I now fortify	1
Against confounding age's cruel knife,	1
That he shall never cut from memory	1
My sweet love's beauty, though my lover's life:	1
His beauty shall in these black lines be seen,	1
And they shall live, and he in them still green.	1

When I have seen by Time's fell hand defaced	1
The rich proud cost of outworn buried age;	1
When sometime lofty towers I see down-razed	1
And brass eternal slave to mortal rage;	1
When I have seen the hungry ocean gain	1
Advantage on the kingdom of the shore,	1
And the firm soil win of the watery main,	1
Increasing store with loss and loss with store;	1
When I have seen such interchange of state,	1
Or state itself confounded to decay;	1
Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate,	1
That Time will come and take my love away.	1
This thought is as a death, which cannot choose	1
But weep to have that which it fears to lose.	1

Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea,	1
But sad mortality o'er-sways their power,	1
How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea,	1
Whose action is no stronger than a flower?	1
O, how shall summer's honey breath hold out	1
Against the wreckful siege of battering days,	1
When rocks impregnable are not so stout,	1
Nor gates of steel so strong, but Time decays?	1
O fearful meditation! where, alack,	1
Shall Time's best jewel from Time's chest lie hid?	1
Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back?	1
Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?	1
O, none, unless this miracle have might,	1
That in black ink my love may still shine bright.	1

Tired with all these, for restful death I cry,	1
As, to behold desert a beggar born,	1
And needy nothing trimm'd in jollity,	1
And purest faith unhappily forsworn,	1
And guilded honour shamefully misplaced,	1
And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted,	1
And right perfection wrongfully disgraced,	1
And strength by limping sway disabled,	1
And art made tongue-tied by authority,	1
And folly doctor-like controlling skill,	1
And simple truth miscall'd simplicity,	1
And captive good attending captain ill:	1
Tired with all these, from these would I be gone,	1
Save that, to die, I leave my love alone.	1

Ah! wherefore with infection should he live,	1
And with his presence grace impiety,	1
That sin by him advantage should achieve	1
And lace itself with his society?	1
Why should false painting imitate his cheek	1
And steal dead seeing of his living hue?	1
Why should poor beauty indirectly seek	1
Roses of shadow, since his rose is true?	1
Why should he live, now Nature bankrupt is,	1
Beggar'd of blood to blush through lively veins?	1
For she hath no exchequer now but his,	1
And, proud of many, lives upon his gains.	1
O, him she stores, to show what wealth she had	1
In days long since, before these last so bad.	1

Thus is his cheek the map of days outworn,	1
When beauty lived and died as flowers do now,	1
Before the bastard signs of fair were born,	1
Or durst inhabit on a living brow;	1
Before the golden tresses of the dead,	1
The right of sepulchres, were shorn away,	1
To live a second life on second head;	1
Ere beauty's dead fleece made another gay:	1
In him those holy antique hours are seen,	1
Without all ornament, itself and true,	1
Making no summer of another's green,	1
Robbing no old to dress his beauty new;	1
And him as for a map doth Nature store,	1
To show false Art what beauty was of yore.	1

Those parts of thee that the world's eye doth view	1
Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend;	1
All tongues, the voice of souls, give thee that due,	1
Uttering bare truth, even so as foes commend.	1
Thy outward thus with outward praise is crown'd;	1
But those same tongues that give thee so thine own	1
In other accents do this praise confound	1
By seeing farther than the eye hath shown.	1
They look into the beauty of thy mind,	1
And that, in guess, they measure by thy deeds;	1
Then, churls, their thoughts, although their eyes were kind,	1
To thy fair flower add the rank smell of weeds:	1
But why thy odour matcheth not thy show,	1
The solve is this, that thou dost common grow.	1

That thou art blamed shall not be thy defect,	1
For slander's mark was ever yet the fair;	1
The ornament of beauty is suspect,	1
A crow that flies in heaven's sweetest air.	1
So thou be good, slander doth but approve	1
Thy worth the greater, being woo'd of time;	1
For canker vice the sweetest buds doth love,	1
And thou present'st a pure unstained prime.	1
Thou hast pass'd by the ambush of young days,	1
Either not assail'd or victor being charged;	1
Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise,	1
To tie up envy evermore enlarged:	1
If some suspect of ill mask'd not thy show,	1
Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe.	1

No longer mourn for me when I am dead	1
Then you shall hear the surly sullen bell	1
Give warning to the world that I am fled	1
From this vile world, with vilest worms to dwell:	1
Nay, if you read this line, remember not	1
The hand that writ it; for I love you so	1
That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot	1
If thinking on me then should make you woe.	1
O, if, I say, you look upon this verse	1
When I perhaps compounded am with clay,	1
Do not so much as my poor name rehearse.	1
But let your love even with my life decay,	1
Lest the wise world should look into your moan	1
And mock you with me after I am gone.	1

O, lest the world should task you to recite	1
What merit lived in me, that you should love	1
After my death, dear love, forget me quite,	1
For you in me can nothing worthy prove;	1
Unless you would devise some virtuous lie,	1
To do more for me than mine own desert,	1
And hang more praise upon deceased I	1
Than niggard truth would willingly impart:	1
O, lest your true love may seem false in this,	1
That you for love speak well of me untrue,	1
My name be buried where my body is,	1
And live no more to shame nor me nor you.	1
For I am shamed by that which I bring forth,	1
And so should you, to love things nothing worth.	1

That time of year thou mayst in me behold	1
When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang	1
Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,	1
Bare ruin'd choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.	1
In me thou seest the twilight of such day	1
As after sunset fadeth in the west,	1
Which by and by black night doth take away,	1
Death's second self, that seals up all in rest.	1
In me thou see'st the glowing of such fire	1
That on the ashes of his youth doth lie,	1
As the death-bed whereon it must expire	1
Consumed with that which it was nourish'd by.	1
This thou perceivest, which makes thy love more strong,	1
To love that well which thou must leave ere long.	1

But be contented: when that fell arrest	1
Without all bail shall carry me away,	1
My life hath in this line some interest,	1
Which for memorial still with thee shall stay.	1
When thou reviewest this, thou dost review	1
The very part was consecrate to thee:	1
The earth can have but earth, which is his due;	1
My spirit is thine, the better part of me:	1
So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life,	1
The prey of worms, my body being dead,	1
The coward conquest of a wretch's knife,	1
Too base of thee to be remembered.	1
The worth of that is that which it contains,	1
And that is this, and this with thee remains.	1

So are you to my thoughts as food to life,	1
Or as sweet-season'd showers are to the ground;	1
And for the peace of you I hold such strife	1
As 'twixt a miser and his wealth is found;	1
Now proud as an enjoyer and anon	1
Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure,	1
Now counting best to be with you alone,	1
Then better'd that the world may see my pleasure;	1
Sometime all full with feasting on your sight	1
And by and by clean starved for a look;	1
Possessing or pursuing no delight,	1
Save what is had or must from you be took.	1
Thus do I pine and surfeit day by day,	1
Or gluttoning on all, or all away.	1

Why is my verse so barren of new pride,	1
So far from variation or quick change?	1
Why with the time do I not glance aside	1
To new-found methods and to compounds strange?	1
Why write I still all one, ever the same,	1
And keep invention in a noted weed,	1
That every word doth almost tell my name,	1
Showing their birth and where they did proceed?	1
O, know, sweet love, I always write of you,	1
And you and love are still my argument;	1
So all my best is dressing old words new,	1
Spending again what is already spent:	1
For as the sun is daily new and old,	1
So is my love still telling what is told.	1

Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear,	1
Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste;	1
The vacant leaves thy mind's imprint will bear,	1
And of this book this learning mayst thou taste.	1
The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show	1
Of mouthed graves will give thee memory;	1
Thou by thy dial's shady stealth mayst know	1
Time's thievish progress to eternity.	1
Look, what thy memory can not contain	1
Commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find	1
Those children nursed, deliver'd from thy brain,	1
To take a new acquaintance of thy mind.	1
These offices, so oft as thou wilt look,	1
Shall profit thee and much enrich thy book.	1

So oft have I invoked thee for my Muse	1
And found such fair assistance in my verse	1
As every alien pen hath got my use	1
And under thee their poesy disperse.	1
Thine eyes that taught the dumb on high to sing	1
And heavy ignorance aloft to fly	1
Have added feathers to the learned's wing	1
And given grace a double majesty.	1
Yet be most proud of that which I compile,	1
Whose influence is thine and born of thee:	1
In others' works thou dost but mend the style,	1
And arts with thy sweet graces graced be;	1
But thou art all my art and dost advance	1
As high as learning my rude ignorance.	1

Whilst I alone did call upon thy aid,	1
My verse alone had all thy gentle grace,	1
But now my gracious numbers are decay'd	1
And my sick Muse doth give another place.	1
I grant, sweet love, thy lovely argument	1
Deserves the travail of a worthier pen,	1
Yet what of thee thy poet doth invent	1
He robs thee of and pays it thee again.	1
He lends thee virtue and he stole that word	1
From thy behavior; beauty doth he give	1
And found it in thy cheek; he can afford	1
No praise to thee but what in thee doth live.	1
Then thank him not for that which he doth say,	1
Since what he owes thee thou thyself dost pay.	1

O, how I faint when I of you do write,	1
Knowing a better spirit doth use your name,	1
And in the praise thereof spends all his might,	1
To make me tongue-tied, speaking of your fame!	1
But since your worth, wide as the ocean is,	1
The humble as the proudest sail doth bear,	1
My saucy bark inferior far to his	1
On your broad main doth wilfully appear.	1
Your shallowest help will hold me up afloat,	1
Whilst he upon your soundless deep doth ride;	1
Or being wreck'd, I am a worthless boat,	1
He of tall building and of goodly pride:	1
Then if he thrive and I be cast away,	1
The worst was this; my love was my decay.	1

Or I shall live your epitaph to make,	1
Or you survive when I in earth am rotten;	1
From hence your memory death cannot take,	1
Although in me each part will be forgotten.	1
Your name from hence immortal life shall have,	1
Though I, once gone, to all the world must die:	1
The earth can yield me but a common grave,	1
When you entombed in men's eyes shall lie.	1
Your monument shall be my gentle verse,	1
Which eyes not yet created shall o'er-read,	1
And tongues to be your being shall rehearse	1
When all the breathers of this world are dead;	1
You still shall live--such virtue hath my pen--	1
Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men.	1

I grant thou wert not married to my Muse	1
And therefore mayst without attaint o'erlook	1
The dedicated words which writers use	1
Of their fair subject, blessing every book	1
Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue,	1
Finding thy worth a limit past my praise,	1
And therefore art enforced to seek anew	1
Some fresher stamp of the time-bettering days	1
And do so, love; yet when they have devised	1
What strained touches rhetoric can lend,	1
Thou truly fair wert truly sympathized	1
In true plain words by thy true-telling friend;	1
And their gross painting might be better used	1
Where cheeks need blood; in thee it is abused.	1

I never saw that you did painting need	1
And therefore to your fair no painting set;	1
I found, or thought I found, you did exceed	1
The barren tender of a poet's debt;	1
And therefore have I slept in your report,	1
That you yourself being extant well might show	1
How far a modern quill doth come too short,	1
Speaking of worth, what worth in you doth grow.	1
This silence for my sin you did impute,	1
Which shall be most my glory, being dumb;	1
For I impair not beauty being mute,	1
When others would give life and bring a tomb.	1
There lives more life in one of your fair eyes	1
Than both your poets can in praise devise.	1

Who is it that says most? which can say more	1
Than this rich praise, that you alone are you?	1
In whose confine immured is the store	1
Which should example where your equal grew.	1
Lean penury within that pen doth dwell	1
That to his subject lends not some small glory;	1
But he that writes of you, if he can tell	1
That you are you, so dignifies his story,	1
Let him but copy what in you is writ,	1
Not making worse what nature made so clear,	1
And such a counterpart shall fame his wit,	1
Making his style admired every where.	1
You to your beauteous blessings add a curse,	1
Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse.	1

My tongue-tied Muse in manners holds her still,	1
While comments of your praise, richly compiled,	1
Reserve their character with golden quill	1
And precious phrase by all the Muses filed.	1
I think good thoughts whilst other write good words,	1
And like unletter'd clerk still cry 'Amen'	1
To every hymn that able spirit affords	1
In polish'd form of well-refined pen.	1
Hearing you praised, I say 'Tis so, 'tis true,'	1
And to the most of praise add something more;	1
But that is in my thought, whose love to you,	1
Though words come hindmost, holds his rank before.	1
Then others for the breath of words respect,	1
Me for my dumb thoughts, speaking in effect.	1

Was it the proud full sail of his great verse,	1
Bound for the prize of all too precious you,	1
That did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearse,	1
Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew?	1
Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write	1
Above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead?	1
No, neither he, nor his compeers by night	1
Giving him aid, my verse astonished.	1
He, nor that affable familiar ghost	1
Which nightly gulls him with intelligence	1
As victors of my silence cannot boast;	1
I was not sick of any fear from thence:	1
But when your countenance fill'd up his line,	1
Then lack'd I matter; that enfeebled mine.	1

Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing,	1
And like enough thou know'st thy estimate:	1
The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing;	1
My bonds in thee are all determinate.	1
For how do I hold thee but by thy granting?	1
And for that riches where is my deserving?	1
The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting,	1
And so my patent back again is swerving.	1
Thyself thou gavest, thy own worth then not knowing,	1
Or me, to whom thou gavest it, else mistaking;	1
So thy great gift, upon misprision growing,	1
Comes home again, on better judgment making.	1
Thus have I had thee, as a dream doth flatter,	1
In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.	1

When thou shalt be disposed to set me light,	1
And place my merit in the eye of scorn,	1
Upon thy side against myself I'll fight,	1
And prove thee virtuous, though thou art forsworn.	1
With mine own weakness being best acquainted,	1
Upon thy part I can set down a story	1
Of faults conceal'd, wherein I am attainted,	1
That thou in losing me shalt win much glory:	1
And I by this will be a gainer too;	1
For bending all my loving thoughts on thee,	1
The injuries that to myself I do,	1
Doing thee vantage, double-vantage me.	1
Such is my love, to thee I so belong,	1
That for thy right myself will bear all wrong.	1

Say that thou didst forsake me for some fault,	1
And I will comment upon that offence;	1
Speak of my lameness, and I straight will halt,	1
Against thy reasons making no defence.	1
Thou canst not, love, disgrace me half so ill,	1
To set a form upon desired change,	1
As I'll myself disgrace: knowing thy will,	1
I will acquaintance strangle and look strange,	1
Be absent from thy walks, and in my tongue	1
Thy sweet beloved name no more shall dwell,	1
Lest I, too much profane, should do it wrong	1
And haply of our old acquaintance tell.	1
For thee against myself I'll vow debate,	1
For I must ne'er love him whom thou dost hate.	1

Then hate me when thou wilt; if ever, now;	1
Now, while the world is bent my deeds to cross,	1
Join with the spite of fortune, make me bow,	1
And do not drop in for an after-loss:	1
Ah, do not, when my heart hath 'scoped this sorrow,	1
Come in the rearward of a conquer'd woe;	1
Give not a windy night a rainy morrow,	1
To linger out a purposed overthrow.	1
If thou wilt leave me, do not leave me last,	1
When other petty griefs have done their spite	1
But in the onset come; so shall I taste	1
At first the very worst of fortune's might,	1
And other strains of woe, which now seem woe,	1
Compared with loss of thee will not seem so.	1

Some glory in their birth, some in their skill,	1
Some in their wealth, some in their bodies' force,	1
Some in their garments, though new-fangled ill,	1
Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse;	1
And every humour hath his adjunct pleasure,	1
Wherein it finds a joy above the rest:	1
But these particulars are not my measure;	1
All these I better in one general best.	1
Thy love is better than high birth to me,	1
Richer than wealth, prouder than garments' cost,	1
Of more delight than hawks or horses be;	1
And having thee, of all men's pride I boast:	1
Wretched in this alone, that thou mayst take	1
All this away and me most wretched make.	1

But do thy worst to steal thyself away,	1
For term of life thou art assured mine,	1
And life no longer than thy love will stay,	1
For it depends upon that love of thine.	1
Then need I not to fear the worst of wrongs,	1
When in the least of them my life hath end.	1
I see a better state to me belongs	1
Than that which on thy humour doth depend;	1
Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind,	1
Since that my life on thy revolt doth lie.	1
O, what a happy title do I find,	1
Happy to have thy love, happy to die!	1
But what's so blessed-fair that fears no blot?	1
Thou mayst be false, and yet I know it not.	1

So shall I live, supposing thou art true,	1
Like a deceived husband; so love's face	1
May still seem love to me, though alter'd new;	1
Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place:	1
For there can live no hatred in thine eye,	1
Therefore in that I cannot know thy change.	1
In many's looks the false heart's history	1
Is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange,	1
But heaven in thy creation did decree	1
That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell;	1
Whate'er thy thoughts or thy heart's workings be,	1
Thy looks should nothing thence but sweetness tell.	1
How like Eve's apple doth thy beauty grow,	1
if thy sweet virtue answer not thy show!	1

They that have power to hurt and will do none,	1
That do not do the thing they most do show,	1
Who, moving others, are themselves as stone,	1
Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow,	1
They rightly do inherit heaven's graces	1
And husband nature's riches from expense;	1
They are the lords and owners of their faces,	1
Others but stewards of their excellence.	1
The summer's flower is to the summer sweet,	1
Though to itself it only live and die,	1
But if that flower with base infection meet,	1
The basest weed outbraves his dignity:	1
For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds;	1
Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds.	1

How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame	1
Which, like a canker in the fragrant rose,	1
Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name!	1
O, in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose!	1
That tongue that tells the story of thy days,	1
Making lascivious comments on thy sport,	1
Cannot dispraise but in a kind of praise;	1
Naming thy name blesses an ill report.	1
O, what a mansion have those vices got	1
Which for their habitation chose out thee,	1
Where beauty's veil doth cover every blot,	1
And all things turn to fair that eyes can see!	1
Take heed, dear heart, of this large privilege;	1
The hardest knife ill-used doth lose his edge.	1

Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonness;	1
Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport;	1
Both grace and faults are loved of more and less;	1
Thou makest faults graces that to thee resort.	1
As on the finger of a throned queen	1
The basest jewel will be well esteem'd,	1
So are those errors that in thee are seen	1
To truths translated and for true things deem'd.	1
How many lambs might the stem wolf betray,	1
If like a lamb he could his looks translate!	1
How many gazers mightst thou lead away,	1
If thou wouldst use the strength of all thy state!	1
But do not so; I love thee in such sort	1
As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report.	1

How like a winter hath my absence been	1
From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year!	1
What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen!	1
What old December's bareness every where!	1
And yet this time removed was summer's time,	1
The teeming autumn, big with rich increase,	1
Bearing the wanton burden of the prime,	1
Like widow'd wombs after their lords' decease:	1
Yet this abundant issue seem'd to me	1
But hope of orphans and unfather'd fruit;	1
For summer and his pleasures wait on thee,	1
And, thou away, the very birds are mute;	1
Or, if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer	1
That leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near.	1

From you have I been absent in the spring,	1
When proud-pied April dress'd in all his trim	1
Hath put a spirit of youth in every thing,	1
That heavy Saturn laugh'd and leap'd with him.	1
Yet nor the lays of birds nor the sweet smell	1
Of different flowers in odour and in hue	1
Could make me any summer's story tell,	1
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew;	1
Nor did I wonder at the lily's white,	1
Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose;	1
They were but sweet, but figures of delight,	1
Drawn after you, you pattern of all those.	1
Yet seem'd it winter still, and, you away,	1
As with your shadow I with these did play:	1

The forward violet thus did I chide:	1
Sweet thief, whence didst thou steal thy sweet that smells,	1
If not from my love's breath? The purple pride	1
Which on thy soft cheek for complexion dwells	1
In my love's veins thou hast too grossly dyed.	1
The lily I condemned for thy hand,	1
And buds of marjoram had stol'n thy hair:	1
The roses fearfully on thorns did stand,	1
One blushing shame, another white despair;	1
A third, nor red nor white, had stol'n of both	1
And to his robbery had annex'd thy breath;	1
But, for his theft, in pride of all his growth	1
A vengeful canker eat him up to death.	1
More flowers I noted, yet I none could s	1

Where art thou, Muse, that thou forget'st so long	1
To speak of that which gives thee all thy might?	1
Spend'st thou thy fury on some worthless song,	1
Darkening thy power to lend base subjects light?	1
Return, forgetful Muse, and straight redeem	1
In gentle numbers time so idly spent;	1
Sing to the ear that doth thy lays esteem	1
And gives thy pen both skill and argument.	1
Rise, resty Muse, my love's sweet face survey,	1
If Time have any wrinkle graven there;	1
If any, be a satire to decay,	1
And make Time's spoils despised every where.	1
Give my love fame faster than Time wastes life;	1
So thou prevent'st his scythe and crooked knife.	1

O truant Muse, what shall be thy amends	1
For thy neglect of truth in beauty dyed?	1
Both truth and beauty on my love depends;	1
So dost thou too, and therein dignified.	1
Make answer, Muse: wilt thou not haply say	1
'Truth needs no colour, with his colour fix'd;	1
Beauty no pencil, beauty's truth to lay;	1
But best is best, if never intermix'd?'	1
Because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb?	1
Excuse not silence so; for't lies in thee	1
To make him much outlive a gilded tomb,	1
And to be praised of ages yet to be.	1
Then do thy office, Muse; I teach thee how	1
To make him seem long hence as he shows now.	1

My love is strengthen'd, though more weak in seeming;	1
I love not less, though less the show appear:	1
That love is merchandized whose rich esteeming	1
The owner's tongue doth publish every where.	1
Our love was new and then but in the spring	1
When I was wont to greet it with my lays,	1
As Philomel in summer's front doth sing	1
And stops her pipe in growth of riper days:	1
Not that the summer is less pleasant now	1
Than when her mournful hymns did hush the night,	1
But that wild music burthens every bough	1
And sweets grown common lose their dear delight.	1
Therefore like her I sometime hold my tongue,	1
Because I would not dull you with my song.	1

Alack, what poverty my Muse brings forth,	1
That having such a scope to show her pride,	1
The argument all bare is of more worth	1
Than when it hath my added praise beside!	1
O, blame me not, if I no more can write!	1
Look in your glass, and there appears a face	1
That over-goes my blunt invention quite,	1
Dulling my lines and doing me disgrace.	1
Were it not sinful then, striving to mend,	1
To mar the subject that before was well?	1
For to no other pass my verses tend	1
Than of your graces and your gifts to tell;	1
And more, much more, than in my verse can sit	1
Your own glass shows you when you look in it.	1

To me, fair friend, you never can be old,	1
For as you were when first your eye I eyed,	1
Such seems your beauty still. Three winters cold	1
Have from the forests shook three summers' pride,	1
Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turn'd	1
In process of the seasons have I seen,	1
Three April perfumes in three hot Junes burn'd,	1
Since first I saw you fresh, which yet are green.	1
Ah! yet doth beauty, like a dial-hand,	1
Steal from his figure and no pace perceived;	1
So your sweet hue, which methinks still doth stand,	1
Hath motion and mine eye may be deceived:	1
For fear of which, hear this, thou age unbred;	1
Ere you were born was beauty's summer dead.	1

Let not my love be call'd idolatry,	1
Nor my beloved as an idol show,	1
Since all alike my songs and praises be	1
To one, of one, still such, and ever so.	1
Kind is my love to-day, to-morrow kind,	1
Still constant in a wondrous excellence;	1
Therefore my verse to constancy confined,	1
One thing expressing, leaves out difference.	1
'Fair, kind and true' is all my argument,	1
'Fair, kind, and true' varying to other words;	1
And in this change is my invention spent,	1
Three themes in one, which wondrous scope affords.	1
'Fair, kind, and true,' have often lived alone,	1
Which three till now never kept seat in one.	1

When in the chronicle of wasted time	1
I see descriptions of the fairest wights,	1
And beauty making beautiful old rhyme	1
In praise of ladies dead and lovely knights,	1
Then, in the blazon of sweet beauty's best,	1
Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow,	1
I see their antique pen would have express'd	1
Even such a beauty as you master now.	1
So all their praises are but prophecies	1
Of this our time, all you prefiguring;	1
And, for they look'd but with divining eyes,	1
They had not skill enough your worth to sing:	1
For we, which now behold these present days,	1
Had eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise.	1

Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul	1
Of the wide world dreaming on things to come,	1
Can yet the lease of my true love control,	1
Supposed as forfeit to a confined doom.	1
The mortal moon hath her eclipse endured	1
And the sad augurs mock their own presage;	1
Incertainties now crown themselves assured	1
And peace proclaims olives of endless age.	1
Now with the drops of this most balmy time	1
My love looks fresh, and death to me subscribes,	1
Since, spite of him, I'll live in this poor rhyme,	1
While he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes:	1
And thou in this shalt find thy monument,	1
When tyrants' crests and tombs of brass are spent.	1

What's in the brain that ink may character	1
Which hath not figured to thee my true spirit?	1
What's new to speak, what new to register,	1
That may express my love or thy dear merit?	1
Nothing, sweet boy; but yet, like prayers divine,	1
I must, each day say o'er the very same,	1
Counting no old thing old, thou mine, I thine,	1
Even as when first I hallow'd thy fair name.	1
So that eternal love in love's fresh case	1
Weighs not the dust and injury of age,	1
Nor gives to necessary wrinkles place,	1
But makes antiquity for aye his page,	1
Finding the first conceit of love there bred	1
Where time and outward form would show it dead.	1

O, never say that I was false of heart,	1
Though absence seem'd my flame to qualify.	1
As easy might I from myself depart	1
As from my soul, which in thy breast doth lie:	1
That is my home of love: if I have ranged,	1
Like him that travels I return again,	1
Just to the time, not with the time exchanged,	1
So that myself bring water for my stain.	1
Never believe, though in my nature reign'd	1
All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood,	1
That it could so preposterously be stain'd,	1
To leave for nothing all thy sum of good;	1
For nothing this wide universe I call,	1
Save thou, my rose; in it thou art my all.	1

Alas, 'tis true I have gone here and there	1
And made myself a motley to the view,	1
Gored mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear,	1
Made old offences of affections new;	1
Most true it is that I have look'd on truth	1
Askance and strangely: but, by all above,	1
These blenches gave my heart another youth,	1
And worse essays proved thee my best of love.	1
Now all is done, have what shall have no end:	1
Mine appetite I never more will grind	1
On newer proof, to try an older friend,	1
A god in love, to whom I am confined.	1
Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best,	1
Even to thy pure and most most loving breast.	1

O, for my sake do you with Fortune chide,	1
The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds,	1
That did not better for my life provide	1
Than public means which public manners breeds.	1
Thence comes it that my name receives a brand,	1
And almost thence my nature is subdued	1
To what it works in, like the dyer's hand:	1
Pity me then and wish I were renew'd;	1
Whilst, like a willing patient, I will drink	1
Potions of eisel 'gainst my strong infection	1
No bitterness that I will bitter think,	1
Nor double penance, to correct correction.	1
Pity me then, dear friend, and I assure ye	1
Even that your pity is enough to cure me.	1

Your love and pity doth the impression fill	1
Which vulgar scandal stamp'd upon my brow;	1
For what care I who calls me well or ill,	1
So you o'er-green my bad, my good allow?	1
You are my all the world, and I must strive	1
To know my shames and praises from your tongue:	1
None else to me, nor I to none alive,	1
That my steel'd sense or changes right or wrong.	1
In so profound abysm I throw all care	1
Of others' voices, that my adder's sense	1
To critic and to flatterer stopped are.	1
Mark how with my neglect I do dispense:	1
You are so strongly in my purpose bred	1
That all the world besides methinks are dead.	1

Since I left you, mine eye is in my mind;	1
And that which governs me to go about	1
Doth part his function and is partly blind,	1
Seems seeing, but effectually is out;	1
For it no form delivers to the heart	1
Of bird of flower, or shape, which it doth latch:	1
Of his quick objects hath the mind no part,	1
Nor his own vision holds what it doth catch:	1
For if it see the rudest or gentlest sight,	1
The most sweet favour or deformed'st creature,	1
The mountain or the sea, the day or night,	1
The crow or dove, it shapes them to your feature:	1
Incapable of more, replete with you,	1
My most true mind thus makes mine eye untrue.	1

Or whether doth my mind, being crown'd with you,	1
Drink up the monarch's plague, this flattery?	1
Or whether shall I say, mine eye saith true,	1
And that your love taught it this alchemy,	1
To make of monsters and things indigest	1
Such cherubins as your sweet self resemble,	1
Creating every bad a perfect best,	1
As fast as objects to his beams assemble?	1
O,'tis the first; 'tis flattery in my seeing,	1
And my great mind most kingly drinks it up:	1
Mine eye well knows what with his gust is 'greeing,	1
And to his palate doth prepare the cup:	1
If it be poison'd, 'tis the lesser sin	1
That mine eye loves it and doth first begin.	1

Those lines that I before have writ do lie,	1
Even those that said I could not love you dearer:	1
Yet then my judgment knew no reason why	1
My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer.	1
But reckoning time, whose million'd accidents	1
Creep in 'twixt vows and change decrees of kings,	1
Tan sacred beauty, blunt the sharp'st intents,	1
Divert strong minds to the course of altering things;	1
Alas, why, fearing of time's tyranny,	1
Might I not then say 'Now I love you best,'	1
When I was certain o'er incertainty,	1
Crowning the present, doubting of the rest?	1
Love is a babe; then might I not say so,	1
To give full growth to that which still doth grow?	1

Let me not to the marriage of true minds	1
Admit impediments. Love is not love	1
Which alters when it alteration finds,	1
Or bends with the remover to remove:	1
O no! it is an ever-fixed mark	1
That looks on tempests and is never shaken;	1
It is the star to every wandering bark,	1
Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken.	1
Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks	1
Within his bending sickle's compass come:	1
Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,	1
But bears it out even to the edge of doom.	1
If this be error and upon me proved,	1
I never writ, nor no man ever loved.	1

Accuse me thus: that I have scanted all	1
Wherein I should your great deserts repay,	1
Forgot upon your dearest love to call,	1
Whereto all bonds do tie me day by day;	1
That I have frequent been with unknown minds	1
And given to time your own dear-purchased right	1
That I have hoisted sail to all the winds	1
Which should transport me farthest from your sight.	1
Book both my wilfulness and errors down	1
And on just proof surmise accumulate;	1
Bring me within the level of your frown,	1
But shoot not at me in your waken'd hate;	1
Since my appeal says I did strive to prove	1
The constancy and virtue of your love.	1

Like as, to make our appetites more keen,	1
With eager compounds we our palate urge,	1
As, to prevent our maladies unseen,	1
We sicken to shun sickness when we purge,	1
Even so, being tuff of your ne'er-cloying sweetness,	1
To bitter sauces did I frame my feeding	1
And, sick of welfare, found a kind of meetness	1
To be diseased ere that there was true needing.	1
Thus policy in love, to anticipate	1
The ills that were not, grew to faults assured	1
And brought to medicine a healthful state	1
Which, rank of goodness, would by ill be cured:	1
But thence I learn, and find the lesson true,	1
Drugs poison him that so fell sick of you.	1

What potions have I drunk of Siren tears,	1
Distill'd from limbecks foul as hell within,	1
Applying fears to hopes and hopes to fears,	1
Still losing when I saw myself to win!	1
What wretched errors hath my heart committed,	1
Whilst it hath thought itself so blessed never!	1
How have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted	1
In the distraction of this madding fever!	1
O benefit of ill! now I find true	1
That better is by evil still made better;	1
And ruin'd love, when it is built anew,	1
Grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater.	1
So I return rebuked to my content	1
And gain by ill thrice more than I have spent.	1

That you were once unkind befriends me now,	1
And for that sorrow which I then did feel	1
Needs must I under my transgression bow,	1
Unless my nerves were brass or hammer'd steel.	1
For if you were by my unkindness shaken	1
As I by yours, you've pass'd a hell of time,	1
And I, a tyrant, have no leisure taken	1
To weigh how once I suffered in your crime.	1
O, that our night of woe might have remember'd	1
My deepest sense, how hard true sorrow hits,	1
And soon to you, as you to me, then tender'd	1
The humble slave which wounded bosoms fits!	1
But that your trespass now becomes a fee;	1
Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransom me.	1

'Tis better to be vile than vile esteem'd,	1
When not to be receives reproach of being,	1
And the just pleasure lost which is so deem'd	1
Not by our feeling but by others' seeing:	1
For why should others false adulterate eyes	1
Give salutation to my sportive blood?	1
Or on my frailties why are frailer spies,	1
Which in their wills count bad what I think good?	1
No, I am that I am, and they that level	1
At my abuses reckon up their own:	1
I may be straight, though they themselves be bevel;	1
By their rank thoughts my deeds must not be shown;	1
Unless this general evil they maintain,	1
All men are bad, and in their badness reign.	1

Thy gift, thy tables, are within my brain	1
Full character'd with lasting memory,	1
Which shall above that idle rank remain	1
Beyond all date, even to eternity;	1
Or at the least, so long as brain and heart	1
Have faculty by nature to subsist;	1
Till each to razed oblivion yield his part	1
Of thee, thy record never can be miss'd.	1
That poor retention could not so much hold,	1
Nor need I tallies thy dear love to score;	1
Therefore to give them from me was I bold,	1
To trust those tables that receive thee more:	1
To keep an adjunct to remember thee	1
Were to import forgetfulness in me.	1

No, Time, thou shalt not boast that I do change:	1
Thy pyramids built up with newer might	1
To me are nothing novel, nothing strange;	1
They are but dressings of a former sight.	1
Our dates are brief, and therefore we admire	1
What thou dost foist upon us that is old,	1
And rather make them born to our desire	1
Than think that we before have heard them told.	1
Thy registers and thee I both defy,	1
Not wondering at the present nor the past,	1
For thy records and what we see doth lie,	1
Made more or less by thy continual haste.	1
This I do vow and this shall ever be;	1
I will be true, despite thy scythe and thee.	1

If my dear love were but the child of state,	1
It might for Fortune's bastard be unfather'd'	1
As subject to Time's love or to Time's hate,	1
Weeds among weeds, or flowers with flowers gather'd.	1
No, it was builded far from accident;	1
It suffers not in smiling pomp, nor falls	1
Under the blow of thralled discontent,	1
Whereto the inviting time our fashion calls:	1
It fears not policy, that heretic,	1
Which works on leases of short-number'd hours,	1
But all alone stands hugely politic,	1
That it nor grows with heat nor drowns with showers.	1
To this I witness call the fools of time,	1
Which die for goodness, who have lived for crime.	1

Were 't aught to me I bore the canopy,	1
With my extern the outward honouring,	1
Or laid great bases for eternity,	1
Which prove more short than waste or ruining?	1
Have I not seen dwellers on form and favour	1
Lose all, and more, by paying too much rent,	1
For compound sweet forgoing simple savour,	1
Pitiful thrivers, in their gazing spent?	1
No, let me be obsequious in thy heart,	1
And take thou my oblation, poor but free,	1
Which is not mix'd with seconds, knows no art,	1
But mutual render, only me for thee.	1
Hence, thou suborn'd informer! a true soul	1
When most impeach'd stands least in thy control.	1

O thou, my lovely boy, who in thy power	1
Dost hold Time's fickle glass, his sickle, hour;	1
Who hast by waning grown, and therein show'st	1
Thy lovers withering as thy sweet self grow'st;	1
If Nature, sovereign mistress over wrack,	1
As thou goest onwards, still will pluck thee back,	1
She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill	1
May time disgrace and wretched minutes kill.	1
Yet fear her, O thou minion of her pleasure!	1
She may detain, but not still keep, her treasure:	1
Her audit, though delay'd, answer'd must be,	1
And her quietus is to render thee.	1
(    )	1
(    )	1

In the old age black was not counted fair,	1
Or if it were, it bore not beauty's name;	1
But now is black beauty's successive heir,	1
And beauty slander'd with a bastard shame:	1
For since each hand hath put on nature's power,	1
Fairing the foul with art's false borrow'd face,	1
Sweet beauty hath no name, no holy bower,	1
But is profaned, if not lives in disgrace.	1
Therefore my mistress' brows are raven black,	1
Her eyes so suited, and they mourners seem	1
At such who, not born fair, no beauty lack,	1
Slandering creation with a false esteem:	1
Yet so they mourn, becoming of their woe,	1
That every tongue says beauty should look so.	1

How oft, when thou, my music, music play'st,	1
Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds	1
With thy sweet fingers, when thou gently sway'st	1
The wiry concord that mine ear confounds,	1
Do I envy those jacks that nimble leap	1
To kiss the tender inward of thy hand,	1
Whilst my poor lips, which should that harvest reap,	1
At the wood's boldness by thee blushing stand!	1
To be so tickled, they would change their state	1
And situation with those dancing chips,	1
O'er whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait,	1
Making dead wood more blest than living lips.	1
Since saucy jacks so happy are in this,	1
Give them thy fingers, me thy lips to kiss.	1

The expense of spirit in a waste of shame	1
Is lust in action; and till action, lust	1
Is perjured, murderous, bloody, full of blame,	1
Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust,	1
Enjoy'd no sooner but despised straight,	1
Past reason hunted, and no sooner had	1
Past reason hated, as a swallow'd bait	1
On purpose laid to make the taker mad;	1
Mad in pursuit and in possession so;	1
Had, having, and in quest to have, extreme;	1
A bliss in proof, and proved, a very woe;	1
Before, a joy proposed; behind, a dream.	1
All this the world well knows; yet none knows well	1
To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.	1

My mistress' eyes are nothing like the sun;	1
Coral is far more red than her lips' red;	1
If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun;	1
If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head.	1
I have seen roses damask'd, red and white,	1
But no such roses see I in her cheeks;	1
And in some perfumes is there more delight	1
Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks.	1
I love to hear her speak, yet well I know	1
That music hath a far more pleasing sound;	1
I grant I never saw a goddess go;	1
My mistress, when she walks, treads on the ground:	1
And yet, by heaven, I think my love as rare	1
As any she belied with false compare.	1

Thou art as tyrannous, so as thou art,	1
As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel;	1
For well thou know'st to my dear doting heart	1
Thou art the fairest and most precious jewel.	1
Yet, in good faith, some say that thee behold	1
Thy face hath not the power to make love groan:	1
To say they err I dare not be so bold,	1
Although I swear it to myself alone.	1
And, to be sure that is not false I swear,	1
A thousand groans, but thinking on thy face,	1
One on another's neck, do witness bear	1
Thy black is fairest in my judgment's place.	1
In nothing art thou black save in thy deeds,	1
And thence this slander, as I think, proceeds.	1

Thine eyes I love, and they, as pitying me,	1
Knowing thy heart torments me with disdain,	1
Have put on black and loving mourners be,	1
Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain.	1
And truly not the morning sun of heaven	1
Better becomes the grey cheeks of the east,	1
Nor that full star that ushers in the even	1
Doth half that glory to the sober west,	1
As those two mourning eyes become thy face:	1
O, let it then as well beseem thy heart	1
To mourn for me, since mourning doth thee grace,	1
And suit thy pity like in every part.	1
Then will I swear beauty herself is black	1
And all they foul that thy complexion lack.	1

Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan	1
For that deep wound it gives my friend and me!	1
Is't not enough to torture me alone,	1
But slave to slavery my sweet'st friend must be?	1
Me from myself thy cruel eye hath taken,	1
And my next self thou harder hast engross'd:	1
Of him, myself, and thee, I am forsaken;	1
A torment thrice threefold thus to be cross'd.	1
Prison my heart in thy steel bosom's ward,	1
But then my friend's heart let my poor heart bail;	1
Whoe'er keeps me, let my heart be his guard;	1
Thou canst not then use rigor in my gaol:	1
And yet thou wilt; for I, being pent in thee,	1
Perforce am thine, and all that is in me.	1

So, now I have confess'd that he is thine,	1
And I myself am mortgaged to thy will,	1
Myself I'll forfeit, so that other mine	1
Thou wilt restore, to be my comfort still:	1
But thou wilt not, nor he will not be free,	1
For thou art covetous and he is kind;	1
He learn'd but surety-like to write for me	1
Under that bond that him as fast doth bind.	1
The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take,	1
Thou usurer, that put'st forth all to use,	1
And sue a friend came debtor for my sake;	1
So him I lose through my unkind abuse.	1
Him have I lost; thou hast both him and me:	1
He pays the whole, and yet am I not free.	1

Whoever hath her wish, thou hast thy 'Will,'	1
And 'Will' to boot, and 'Will' in overplus;	1
More than enough am I that vex thee still,	1
To thy sweet will making addition thus.	1
Wilt thou, whose will is large and spacious,	1
Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine?	1
Shall will in others seem right gracious,	1
And in my will no fair acceptance shine?	1
The sea all water, yet receives rain still	1
And in abundance addeth to his store;	1
So thou, being rich in 'Will,' add to thy 'Will'	1
One will of mine, to make thy large 'Will' more.	1
Let no unkind, no fair beseechers kill;	1
Think all but one, and me in that one 'Will.'	1

If thy soul cheque thee that I come so near,	1
Swear to thy blind soul that I was thy 'Will,'	1
And will, thy soul knows, is admitted there;	1
Thus far for love my love-suit, sweet, fulfil.	1
'Will' will fulfil the treasure of thy love,	1
Ay, fill it full with wills, and my will one.	1
In things of great receipt with ease we prove	1
Among a number one is reckon'd none:	1
Then in the number let me pass untold,	1
Though in thy stores' account I one must be;	1
For nothing hold me, so it please thee hold	1
That nothing me, a something sweet to thee:	1
Make but my name thy love, and love that still,	1
And then thou lovest me, for my name is 'Will.'	1

Thou blind fool, Love, what dost thou to mine eyes,	1
That they behold, and see not what they see?	1
They know what beauty is, see where it lies,	1
Yet what the best is take the worst to be.	1
If eyes corrupt by over-partial looks	1
Be anchor'd in the bay where all men ride,	1
Why of eyes' falsehood hast thou forged hooks,	1
Whereto the judgment of my heart is tied?	1
Why should my heart think that a several plot	1
Which my heart knows the wide world's common place?	1
Or mine eyes seeing this, say this is not,	1
To put fair truth upon so foul a face?	1
In things right true my heart and eyes have erred,	1
And to this false plague are they now transferr'd.	1

When my love swears that she is made of truth	1
I do believe her, though I know she lies,	1
That she might think me some untutor'd youth,	1
Unlearned in the world's false subtleties.	1
Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,	1
Although she knows my days are past the best,	1
Simply I credit her false speaking tongue:	1
On both sides thus is simple truth suppress'd.	1
But wherefore says she not she is unjust?	1
And wherefore say not I that I am old?	1
O, love's best habit is in seeming trust,	1
And age in love loves not to have years told:	1
Therefore I lie with her and she with me,	1
And in our faults by lies we flatter'd be.	1

O, call not me to justify the wrong	1
That thy unkindness lays upon my heart;	1
Wound me not with thine eye but with thy tongue;	1
Use power with power and slay me not by art.	1
Tell me thou lovest elsewhere, but in my sight,	1
Dear heart, forbear to glance thine eye aside:	1
What need'st thou wound with cunning when thy might	1
Is more than my o'er-press'd defense can bide?	1
Let me excuse thee: ah! my love well knows	1
Her pretty looks have been mine enemies,	1
And therefore from my face she turns my foes,	1
That they elsewhere might dart their injuries:	1
Yet do not so; but since I am near slain,	1
Kill me outright with looks and rid my pain.	1

Be wise as thou art cruel; do not press	1
My tongue-tied patience with too much disdain;	1
Lest sorrow lend me words and words express	1
The manner of my pity-wanting pain.	1
If I might teach thee wit, better it were,	1
Though not to love, yet, love, to tell me so;	1
As testy sick men, when their deaths be near,	1
No news but health from their physicians know;	1
For if I should despair, I should grow mad,	1
And in my madness might speak ill of thee:	1
Now this ill-wresting world is grown so bad,	1
Mad slanderers by mad ears believed be,	1
That I may not be so, nor thou belied,	1
Bear thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart go wide.	1

In faith, I do not love thee with mine eyes,	1
For they in thee a thousand errors note;	1
But 'tis my heart that loves what they despise,	1
Who in despite of view is pleased to dote;	1
Nor are mine ears with thy tongue's tune delighted,	1
Nor tender feeling, to base touches prone,	1
Nor taste, nor smell, desire to be invited	1
To any sensual feast with thee alone:	1
But my five wits nor my five senses can	1
Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee,	1
Who leaves unsway'd the likeness of a man,	1
Thy proud hearts slave and vassal wretch to be:	1
Only my plague thus far I count my gain,	1
That she that makes me sin awards me pain.	1

Love is my sin and thy dear virtue hate,	1
Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving:	1
O, but with mine compare thou thine own state,	1
And thou shalt find it merits not reproving;	1
Or, if it do, not from those lips of thine,	1
That have profaned their scarlet ornaments	1
And seal'd false bonds of love as oft as mine,	1
Robb'd others' beds' revenues of their rents.	1
Be it lawful I love thee, as thou lovest those	1
Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee:	1
Root pity in thy heart, that when it grows	1
Thy pity may deserve to pitied be.	1
If thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide,	1
By self-example mayst thou be denied!	1

Lo! as a careful housewife runs to catch	1
One of her feather'd creatures broke away,	1
Sets down her babe and makes an swift dispatch	1
In pursuit of the thing she would have stay,	1
Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase,	1
Cries to catch her whose busy care is bent	1
To follow that which flies before her face,	1
Not prizing her poor infant's discontent;	1
So runn'st thou after that which flies from thee,	1
Whilst I thy babe chase thee afar behind;	1
But if thou catch thy hope, turn back to me,	1
And play the mother's part, kiss me, be kind:	1
So will I pray that thou mayst have thy 'Will,'	1
If thou turn back, and my loud crying still.	1

Two loves I have of comfort and despair,	1
Which like two spirits do suggest me still:	1
The better angel is a man right fair,	1
The worser spirit a woman colour'd ill.	1
To win me soon to hell, my female evil	1
Tempteth my better angel from my side,	1
And would corrupt my saint to be a devil,	1
Wooing his purity with her foul pride.	1
And whether that my angel be turn'd fiend	1
Suspect I may, but not directly tell;	1
But being both from me, both to each friend,	1
I guess one angel in another's hell:	1
Yet this shall I ne'er know, but live in doubt,	1
Till my bad angel fire my good one out.	1

Those lips that Love's own hand did make	1
Breathed forth the sound that said 'I hate'	1
To me that languish'd for her sake;	1
But when she saw my woeful state,	1
Straight in her heart did mercy come,	1
Chiding that tongue that ever sweet	1
Was used in giving gentle doom,	1
And taught it thus anew to greet:	1
'I hate' she alter'd with an end,	1
That follow'd it as gentle day	1
Doth follow night, who like a fiend	1
From heaven to hell is flown away;	1
'I hate' from hate away she threw,	1
And saved my life, saying 'not you.'	1

Poor soul, the centre of my sinful earth,	1
[                 ] these rebel powers that thee array;	1
Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth,	1
Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?	1
Why so large cost, having so short a lease,	1
Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend?	1
Shall worms, inheritors of this excess,	1
Eat up thy charge? is this thy body's end?	1
Then soul, live thou upon thy servant's loss,	1
And let that pine to aggravate thy store;	1
Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross;	1
Within be fed, without be rich no more:	1
So shalt thou feed on Death, that feeds on men,	1
And Death once dead, there's no more dying then.	1

My love is as a fever, longing still	1
For that which longer nurseth the disease,	1
Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill,	1
The uncertain sickly appetite to please.	1
My reason, the physician to my love,	1
Angry that his prescriptions are not kept,	1
Hath left me, and I desperate now approve	1
Desire is death, which physic did except.	1
Past cure I am, now reason is past care,	1
And frantic-mad with evermore unrest;	1
My thoughts and my discourse as madmen's are,	1
At random from the truth vainly express'd;	1
For I have sworn thee fair and thought thee bright,	1
Who art as black as hell, as dark as night.	1

O me, what eyes hath Love put in my head,	1
Which have no correspondence with true sight!	1
Or, if they have, where is my judgment fled,	1
That censures falsely what they see aright?	1
If that be fair whereon my false eyes dote,	1
What means the world to say it is not so?	1
If it be not, then love doth well denote	1
Love's eye is not so true as all men's 'No.'	1
How can it? O, how can Love's eye be true,	1
That is so vex'd with watching and with tears?	1
No marvel then, though I mistake my view;	1
The sun itself sees not till heaven clears.	1
O cunning Love! with tears thou keep'st me blind,	1
Lest eyes well-seeing thy foul faults should find.	1

Canst thou, O cruel! say I love thee not,	1
When I against myself with thee partake?	1
Do I not think on thee, when I forgot	1
Am of myself, all tyrant, for thy sake?	1
Who hateth thee that I do call my friend?	1
On whom frown'st thou that I do fawn upon?	1
Nay, if thou lour'st on me, do I not spend	1
Revenge upon myself with present moan?	1
What merit do I in myself respect,	1
That is so proud thy service to despise,	1
When all my best doth worship thy defect,	1
Commanded by the motion of thine eyes?	1
But, love, hate on, for now I know thy mind;	1
Those that can see thou lovest, and I am blind.	1

O, from what power hast thou this powerful might	1
With insufficiency my heart to sway?	1
To make me give the lie to my true sight,	1
And swear that brightness doth not grace the day?	1
Whence hast thou this becoming of things ill,	1
That in the very refuse of thy deeds	1
There is such strength and warrantize of skill	1
That, in my mind, thy worst all best exceeds?	1
Who taught thee how to make me love thee more	1
The more I hear and see just cause of hate?	1
O, though I love what others do abhor,	1
With others thou shouldst not abhor my state:	1
If thy unworthiness raised love in me,	1
More worthy I to be beloved of thee.	1

Love is too young to know what conscience is;	1
Yet who knows not conscience is born of love?	1
Then, gentle cheater, urge not my amiss,	1
Lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove:	1
For, thou betraying me, I do betray	1
My nobler part to my gross body's treason;	1
My soul doth tell my body that he may	1
Triumph in love; flesh stays no father reason;	1
But, rising at thy name, doth point out thee	1
As his triumphant prize. Proud of this pride,	1
He is contented thy poor drudge to be,	1
To stand in thy affairs, fall by thy side.	1
No want of conscience hold it that I call	1
Her 'love' for whose dear love I rise and fall.	1

In loving thee thou know'st I am forsworn,	1
But thou art twice forsworn, to me love swearing,	1
In act thy bed-vow broke and new faith torn,	1
In vowing new hate after new love bearing.	1
But why of two oaths' breach do I accuse thee,	1
When I break twenty? I am perjured most;	1
For all my vows are oaths but to misuse thee	1
And all my honest faith in thee is lost,	1
For I have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness,	1
Oaths of thy love, thy truth, thy constancy,	1
And, to enlighten thee, gave eyes to blindness,	1
Or made them swear against the thing they see;	1
For I have sworn thee fair; more perjured I,	1
To swear against the truth so foul a lie!	1

Cupid laid by his brand, and fell asleep:	1
A maid of Dian's this advantage found,	1
And his love-kindling fire did quickly steep	1
In a cold valley-fountain of that ground;	1
Which borrow'd from this holy fire of Love	1
A dateless lively heat, still to endure,	1
And grew a seething bath, which yet men prove	1
Against strange maladies a sovereign cure.	1
But at my mistress' eye Love's brand new-fired,	1
The boy for trial needs would touch my breast;	1
I, sick withal, the help of bath desired,	1
And thither hied, a sad distemper'd guest,	1
But found no cure: the bath for my help lies	1
Where Cupid got new fire--my mistress' eyes.	1

The little Love-god lying once asleep	1
Laid by his side his heart-inflaming brand,	1
Whilst many nymphs that vow'd chaste life to keep	1
Came tripping by; but in her maiden hand	1
The fairest votary took up that fire	1
Which many legions of true hearts had warm'd;	1
And so the general of hot desire	1
Was sleeping by a virgin hand disarm'd.	1
This brand she quenched in a cool well by,	1
Which from Love's fire took heat perpetual,	1
Growing a bath and healthful remedy	1
For men diseased; but I, my mistress' thrall,	1
Came there for cure, and this by that I prove,	1
Love's fire heats water, water cools not love.	1

A Bible Christian I will be,	0
For Christ has done so much for me;	0
Then how could I my Lord deny,	0
And on the words of men rely?	0
The Bibles good enough for me,	0
The Bibles truth my creed shall be;	0
From human creeds I turn away,	0
I stand for Christ alone today.	0
Tho many follow human plans,	0
Believe the creeds set up by man;	0
No other creed have I today	0
Than Christ, who is the Truth, the Way.	0
The Word by inspiration givn,	0
The chart that points the way to Heavn;	0
On this I dare and will depend,	0
And with my life its truth defend.	0
Believe in Christ, repent of sin,	0
Confess your faith, and peace youll win;	0
Then neath the water with Him go,	0
And you His peace and joy shall know.	0

A fervent prayer rose up to heaven,	0
A fragile soul was losing ground	0
Sorting through this earthly babble,	0
Heaven heard the sound.	0
It was a life of no distinction,	0
No successes, only tries.	0
Yet, gazing down on this unlovely one,	0
There was love in Heaven's Eyes.	0
The orphaned child, the wayward father,	0
The homeless traveler in the rain	0
When life goes by and no one bothers,	0
Heaven feels the pain.	0
Looking down, God sees each heartache,	0
Knows each sorrow, hears each cry,	0
And looking up, we'll see compassion's	0
Fire ablaze in Heaven's Eyes.	0
In Heaven's Eyes, there are no losers,	0
In Heaven's Eyes, no hopeless cause.	0
Only people like you, with feelings like me	0
And we're amazed at the grace we can find	0
In Heaven's Eyes.	0

A Few more days on earth to spend.	0
And all my toils and cares shall end,	0
And I shall see my God and Friend,	0
And praise His name on high;	0
No more to sigh or shed a tear,	0
No more to suffer pain or fear,	0
But God, and Christ, and heav'n appear	0
Unto the raptured eye.	0
Then, O my soul, despond no more,	0
The storm of life will soon be o'er.	0
And I shall find the peaceful shore,	0
Of everlasting rest,	0
O happy day, O joyful hour!	0
When freed from earth my soul shall tow'r	0
Beyond the reach of Satan's pow'r.	0
To be forever blest.	0
My soul anticipates the day;	0
I'll joyfully the call obey	0
Which comes to summon me away	0
To seats prepared above;	0
There I shall see my Saviour's face,	0
And dwell in his beloved embrace,	0
And taste the fullness of his grace,	0
And sing redeeming love.	0

A few more years shall roll,	0
A few more seasons come,	0
And we shall be with those that rest	0
Asleep within the tomb;	0
Then, O my Lord, prepare	0
My soul for that great day.	0
O wash me in Thy precious blood,	0
And take my sins away.	0
A few more suns shall set	0
O'er these dark hills of time,	0
And we shall be where suns are not	0
A far serener clime:	0
Then, O my Lord, prepare	0
My soul for that blest day.	0
O wash me in Thy precious blood,	0
And take my sins away.	0
A few more storms shall beat	0
On this wild rocky shore,	0
And we shall be where tempests cease,	0
And surges swell no more;	0
Then, O my Lord, prepare	0
My soul for that calm day.	0
O wash me in Thy precious blood,	0
And take my sins away.	0
A few more struggles here,	0
A few more partings o'er,	0
A few more toils, a few more tears,	0
And we shall weep no more:	0
Then, O my Lord, prepare	0
My soul for that bright day.	0
O wash me in Thy precious blood,	0
And take my sins away.	0
'Tis but a little while,	0
And He shall come again	0
Who died that we might live, Who lives	0
That we with Him may reign;	0
Then, O my Lord, prepare	0
My soul for that glad day.	0
O wash me in Thy precious blood,	0
And take my sins away.	0

A foolish king for his own praise,	0
An image made of gold,	0
Then bade all to bow down their heads,	0
but three alone stood bold.	0
And so the king in might rage--	0
He cast them in the flame.	0
Yet God saved them from scorching fire,	0
And death the overcame.	0
O Father, those men like your Son,	0
Would not to Satan bend.	0
If we for Your sake risk our lives,	0
Will our lives you defend?	0
My soul is set at rest because	0
Your Word has promised those,	0
Who through The Son come unto you	0
Shall conquer all their foes.	0

A great and mighty wonder,	0
a full and holy cure!	0
The Virgin bears the Infant	0
with virgin-honor pure:	0
"To God on high be glory,	0
and peace on earth to men."	0
The Word becomes incarnate,	0
and yet remains on high;	0
and cherubim sing anthems	0
to shepherds from the sky;	0
While thus they sing your Monarch,	0
those bright angelic bands,	0
rejoice, ye vales and mountains,	0
ye oceans, clap your hands:	0
Since all he comes to ransom,	0
by all be he adored,	0
the infant born in Bethlehem,	0
the Savior and the Lord:	0

If I was a preaching man, I tell you what I'd do:	0
I'd preach the truth throughout the land	0
and work on a building, too.	0
I'm working on a building, I'm working on a building,	0
I'm working on a building for my Lord, for my Lord!	0
It's a Holy Ghost building, it's a Holy Ghost building,	0
It's a Holy Ghost building, for my Lord, for my Lord!	0
If I was a carpenter I tell you what I'd do:	0
I'd work all day and work all night	0
just to work on the building, too.	0
I'm working on a building, I'm working on a building,	0
I'm working on a building for my Lord, for my Lord!	0
It's a Holy Ghost building, it's a Holy Ghost building,	0
It's a Holy Ghost building, for my Lord, for my Lord!	0
If I was a ramblin' man, I tell you what I'd do:	0
I'd stop my rambling, stop my gambling,	0
and work on a building, too.	0
I'm working on a building, I'm working on a building,	0
I'm working on a building for my Lord, for my Lord!	0
It's a Holy Ghost building, it's a Holy Ghost building,	0
It's a Holy Ghost building, for my Lord, for my Lord!	0
If I was gambling man, I tell you what I'd do:	0
I'd throw away the Queen of Spades	0
and work on a building, too.	0
I'm working on a building, I'm working on a building,	0
I'm working on a building for my Lord, for my Lord!	0
It's a Holy Ghost building, it's a Holy Ghost building,	0
It's a Holy Ghost building, for my Lord, for my Lord!	0
If I was a sinner man, I tell you what I'd do:	0
I'd stop my sinning, start my praying,	0
and work on a building, too.	0
I'm working on a building, I'm working on a building,	0
I'm working on a building for my Lord, for my Lord!	0
It's a Holy Ghost building, it's a Holy Ghost building,	0
It's a Holy Ghost building, for my Lord, for my Lord!	0

A Home in heav'n! what a joyful thought!	0
As the poor man toils in his weary lot;	0
His heart oppressed, and with anguish riv'n,	0
From his home below to a home in heav'n.	0
A home in heav'n! as the suff'rer lies	0
On his bed of pain, and uplifts his eyes	0
To that bright home what a joy is giv'n.	0
With the blessed thought of a home in heav'n.	0
A home in heav'n! when our pleasures fade,	0
And our wealth and fame in the dust are laid,	0
And our strength decays, and our health is riv'n,	0
We are happy still with our home in heav'n.	0
A home in heav'n! when the sinner mourns,	0
And with contrite heart to the Saviour turns;	0
O then what bliss in that heart forgiv'n,	0
Does the hope inspire of a home in heav'n!	0
A home in heav'n! when our friends are fled	0
To the cheerless home of the mould'ring dead;	0
We wait in hope of the promise giv'n,	0
We will meet again in our home in heav'n.	0

In the twinkling of an eye	0
My Lord will come for you and I	0
We know not when that day will be	0
When Jesus comes and sets us free	0
Be prepared each minute and day	0
Look for the sign he's on his way	0
Rejoice and praise his Holy name	0
Don't seek riches nor not fame	0
He will come upon a horse white	0
For all to see by day or night	0
The rapture finally is close at hand	0
Stand your guard my mortal man	0
In the twinkling of an eye	0
My Lord will come for you and I	0
We know not when that day will be	0
When Jesus comes and sets us free	0

People steal, they cheat and lie	0
For wealth and what it will buy.	0
But they don't know on the Judgment Day	0
That Gold and silver will melt away	0
I'd rather be in a deep dark grave	0
And know that my poor soul was saved.	0
Than to live in this world in a House of Gold	0
And deny my God and doom my soul	0
What good is Gold and silver, too	0
If your heart's not good and true	0
Sinner hear me when I say	0
Fall down on your knees and pray	0

A hymn of glory let us sing,	0
new hymns throughout the world shall ring;	0
by a new way none ever trod	0
Christ takes his place--the throne of God!	0
You are a present joy, O Lord;	0
you will be ever our reward;	0
and great the light in you we see	0
to guide us to eternity.	0
O risen Christ, ascended Lord,	0
all praise to you let earth accord,	0
who are, while endless ages run,	0
with Father and with Spirit, One.	0

O God, inspire our morning hymn	0
Of love and gratitude;	0
Oh, bless the sacrifice we bring,	0
Thou Source of every good.	0
Touched by Thy hand of love, we wake,	0
And rise from sweet repose;	0
Thy praise shall first the silence break,	0
Thy peace within us flows.	0
Thy miracle of love so sweet	0
Preserved us all secure;	0
While helpless in unconscious sleep,	0
Thy presence kept us pure.	0
Tis blest to rise, O Lord, and join	0
With natures minstrelsy;	0
To hymn Thy praise at early morn,	0
And offer thanks to Thee.	0
Sweet morning is the time to pray;	0
How lovely and how meet,	0
To send our early thoughts away	0
Up to the mercy seat.	0
The glorious sun has driven far	0
The mystic shades of night;	0
So in our souls the morning star	0
Hath shed His wondrous light.	0

A Lamb goes uncomplaining forth,	0
The guilt of all men bearing;	0
And laden with the sins of earth,	0
None else the burden sharing!	0
Goes patient on, grow weak and faint,	0
To slaughter led without complaint,	0
That spotless life to offer;	0
Bears shame and stripes, and wounds and death,	0
Anguish and mockery, and saith,	0
"Willing all this I suffer."	0
This Lamb is Christ, the soul's great Friend,	0
The Lamb of God, our Savior;	0
Him God the Father chose to send	0
To gain for us His favor.	0
"Go forth, My Son," the Father saith,	0
"And free men from the fear of death,	0
From guilt and condemnation.	0
The wrath and stripes are hard to bear,	0
But by Thy Passion men shall share	0
The fruit of Thy salvation."	0
"Yea, Father, yea, most willingly	0
I'll bear what Thou commandest;	0
My will conforms to Thy decree,	0
I do what Thou demandest."	0
O wondrous Love, what hast Thou done!	0
The Father offers up His Son!	0
The Son, content, descendeth!	0
O Love, how strong Thou art to save!	0
Thou beddest Him within the grave	0
Whose word the mountains rendeth.	0
From morn till eve my theme shall be	0
Thy mercy's wondrous measure;	0
To sacrifice myself for Thee	0
Shall be my aim and pleasure.	0
My stream of life shall ever be	0
A current flowing ceaselessly,	0
Thy constant praise outpouring.	0
I'll treasure in my memory,	0
O Lord, all Thou hast done for me,	0
Thy gracious love adoring.	0
Of death I am no more afraid,	0
New life from Thee is flowing;	0
Thy cross affords me cooling shade	0
When noonday's sun is glowing.	0
When by my grief I am opprest,	0
On Thee my weary soul shall rest	0
Serenely as on pillows.	0
Thou art my Anchor when by woe	0
My bark is driven to and fro	0
On trouble's surging billows.	0
And when Thy glory I shall see	0
And taste Thy kingdom's pleasure,	0
Thy blood my royal robe shall be,	0
My joy beyond all measure.	0
When I appear before Thy throne,	0
Thy righteousness shall be my crown,-	0
With these I need not hide me.	0
And there, in garments richly wrought	0
As Thine own bride, I shall be brought	0
To stand in joy beside Thee.	0

Just before His trial, Jesus entered dark Gethsemane;	0
Leaving eight outside, took Peter and two sons of Zebedee.	0
Oh, the anguish in the garden, as again He left the three;	0
And He went a little farther, all the way to Calvary!	0
Let us go a little farther, farther than weve gone before;	0
Are we workers now for Jesus? Let us do a little more.	0
See Him praying, hear him groaning; death sweeps oer Him like a flood;	0
Let this cup pass from me, Father"sweat runs down as drops of blood!	0
Not my will, Lord, I will drink it: let Thy will be done in me."	0
And He went a little farther, all the way to Calvary!	0
Then at Pilates hall, behold Him, as the mob who mocked him cried,	0
Away, away, give us Barabbas; let this Christ be crucified!"	0
Oh, Barabbas, oh, Barabbas, Jesus surely died for thee,	0
When He went a little farther, all the way to Calvary!	0
Now He marches to Golgotha, scourged and thorn-crowned on the road;	0
Bears the cross upon His shoulder, sinks beneath the heavy load!	0
Mocked, reviled, by friends forsakenall for you, and all for me	0
And He went a little farther, all the way to Calvary!	0

O a little talk with Jesus make it right, all right	0
Little talk with Jesus make it right, all right	0
Troubles of evry kind	0
Hank God Ill always find	0
That little talk with Jesus make it right.	0
My brother, I remember when I was a sinner lost	0
I cried, Have mercy, Jesus"	0
But still my soul was tossed	0
Till I heard King Jesus say,	0
Come here, Im on the way"	0
And little talk with Jesus make it right.	0
Sometimes the fork lightning and muttering thunder, too	0
Of trials and temptations	0
Make it hard for me and you	0
But Jesus was a friend,	0
Hell keep us to the end	0
And little talk with Jesus make it right.	0
My brother and my sister, you have trials like me	0
When we are trying to serve the Lord	0
And win the victory	0
Old Satan fight us hard	0
Our journey to retard	0
But little talk with Jesus make it right.	0

In this world I walk alone	0
With no place to call my home	0
But there's one who holds my hand	0
The rugged road through barren lands	0
The way is dark the road is steep	0
But He's become my eyes to see	0
The strength to climb my grief's to bear	0
The Savior lives inside me there	0
In Your love I find release	0
A haven from my unbelief	0
Take my life and let me be	0
A living prayer my God to Thee	0
In these trials of life I find	0
Another voice inside my mind	0
He comforts me and bids me live	0
Inside the love the Father gives	0

I love the Christ, the Son of God,	0
Who died that I might live;	0
I would my gratitude express,	0
A gift unto Him give.	0
My gift is small, it is my all,	0
Accept it, Lord, I pray;	0
Let self be slain, let Jesus reign	0
Within my heart alway.	0
I fail to find a sacrifice,	0
Or fitting gift to bring;	0
Earths treasures have too little worth	0
To offer to my King.	0
No gift, however grand or great,	0
Could pay the debt I owe;	0
I bring myself, my life, my all,	0
A living gift bestow.	0
My members all I gladly yield	0
For service, Lord, to Thee;	0
To bear the blessed gospel light,	0
That others Christ may see.	0

A long time ago, there was a man	0
Who laid his life on the line	0
He claimed he could make the lame walk again	0
And give back the sight to the blind	0
Now some people loved him	0
Some people wanted to take him and put him away	0
Well I wasn't there to see what he did	0
But if he was right here today.	0
I would crawl all the way to the river	0
I would crawl all the way to the sea	0
Just to watch him walk on the water	0
And lay his loving hands on me.	0
A carpenter by trade, but the kingdom that he made	0
Was built without hammer and nail	0
It stands like a rock though the ages of time	0
It was built with a love that never fails	0
I read in the good book that some day he's coming	0
And some say it ain't far away	0
On the day that he stands on the banks of the Jordan	0
I know I will be on my way	0

A mansion is waiting in glory,	0
My Savior has gone to prepare;	0
The ransomed who shine in its beauty,	0
Will dwell in that city so fair.	0
Oh, home above,	0
Im going to dwell in that home;	0
Oh, home of love,	0
Get ready, poor sinner, and come.	0
A mansion of rest for the weary,	0
Who toil in the vineyard of love;	0
O sinner, believe, and be ready	0
To enter that mansion above.	0
Enraptures the glorified throng;	0
Theyre singing salvation, O sinner,	0
Come, join in that beautiful song.	0
A mansion where angels are waiting	0
To welcome the holy and true,	0
And when to the Savior low kneeling,	0
Theyll sing a sweet anthem for you.	0
A mansion unclouded by sorrow,	0
Undimmed by the pains of farewell,	0
Where all of earths pilgrims will gather,	0
With Christ in His glory to dwell.	0

Take this message to my mother	0
It will fill her heart with joy	0
Tell her that I've met my Saviour	0
God has saved her wand'ring boy.	0
The tears and sorrow I have caused her	0
How I wish I could re-pay	0
But tell her I'll be waiting for her	0
We'll meet in heaven some glad day.	0
How she cried when I left her	0
I know it filled her heart with pain	0
She said, "Son, please don't leave me	0
For we may never meet again."	0
Years have passed since that parting	0
But I know she waits and prays	0
Soon I'll cross that dark river	0
Please let her know that I was saved.	0

A mighty fortress is our God,	0
a bulwark never failing;	0
Our helper he, amid the flood	0
of mortal ills prevailing:	0
For still our ancient foe	0
doth seek to work us woe;	0
His craft and power are great,	0
and, armed with cruel hate,	0
On earth is not his equal.	0
Did we in our strength confide,	0
our striving would be losing;	0
Were not the right Man on our side,	0
the Man of God's own choosing:	0
Dost ask who that may be?	0
Christ Jesus, it is He;	0
Lord Sabbaoth, His Name,	0
from age to age the same,	0
And He must win the battle.	0
And though this world, with devils filled,	0
should threaten to undo us,	0
We will not fear, for God hath willed	0
his truth to triumph through us:	0
the Prince of Darkness grim,	0
we tremble not for him;	0
His rage we can endure,	0
for lo, his doom is sure,	0
one little word shall fell him.	0
That word above all earthly powers,	0
no thanks to them, abideth;	0
The Spirit and the gifts are ours	0
through Him Who with us sideth:	0
Let good and kindred go,	0
this mortal life also;	0
the body they may kill:	0
God's truth abideth still,	0
his kingdom is forever.	0

All my life long I had panted	0
For a draught from some cool spring,	0
That I hoped would quench the burning	0
Of the thirst I felt within.	0
Hallelujah! I have found Him	0
Whom my soul so long has craved!	0
Jesus satisfies my longings;	0
Through His life I now am saved.	0
Feeding on the husks around me,	0
Till my strength was almost gone,	0
Longed my soul for something better,	0
Only still to hunger on.	0
Poor I was, and sought for riches,	0
Something that would satisfy,	0
But the dust I gathered round me	0
Only mocked my soul's sad cry.	0
Well of water, ever springing,	0
Bread of life, so rich and free,	0
Untold wealth that never faileth,	0
My Redeemer is to me.	0

A mighty mystery we set forth,	0
A wondrous sign and seal;	0
Lord, give our hearts to know its worth,	0
And all its truth to feel.	0
Death to the world we thus avow,	0
Death to each sinful lust;	0
The risen life is our life now,	0
The risen Christ our trust.	0
Baptised into the Father's name,	0
We're children of our God;	0
Baptised into the Son, we claim	0
The ransom of his blood.	0
Baptised into the Holy Ghost,	0
In this accepted hour,	0
Give us to own the Pentecost,	0
And the descending power.	0

There is going to be a brand new morning.	0
There is going to be a brand new day.	0
Rest assured that day is coming	0
when Jesus comes to take me away.	0
The angels are rejoicing in heaven	0
They have waited so long for me.	0
I'm been working to get my life in order	0
Now I'm ready for the jubilee.	0
When they open the gates in heaven	0
He will descend on a beautiful cloud.	0
His arms will be open to me	0
As the trumpets sound out loud.	0
The thorns that once adorned his brow for all the world to see.	0
Will be a golden crown for him to wear for all eternity.	0

For a fresh anointing, Lord, for service	0
Come we now in Jesus precious name;	0
For the blessed Pentecostal fullness,	0
Every heart with heavnly love aflame.	0
Send a new touch of fire on our souls, Lord,	0
Send it now, Lord, send it now, Lord;	0
Touch our lips today with the living coals,	0
Send a new touch of fire on our souls.	0
Make us free to tell the gospel story,	0
Liberty in service may we have;	0
Showing forth the Saviors grace and glory,	0
Telling of His wondrous powr to save.	0
Bringing all we have in consecration	0
As a living sacrifice for Thee;	0
Trusting for an uttermost salvation,	0
Jesus precious blood our only plea.	0
Let the great Refiner throughly purge us,	0
Purify our hearts like as by fire;	0
While for all the sanctifying fullness	0
Here our waiting, longing hearts aspire.	0

A Pilgrim and a Stranger,	0
I journey here below;	0
Far distant is my country,	0
The home to which I go.	0
Here I must toil and travail,	0
Oft weary and opprest;	0
But there my God shall lead me	0
To everlasting rest.	0
I've met with storms and danger	0
E'en from my early years,	0
With enemies and conflicts,	0
With fightings and with fears.	0
There's nothing here that tempts me	0
To wish a longer stay,	0
So I must hasten forward,	0
No halting or delay.	0
It is a well-worn pathway;	0
A host has gone before,	0
The holy saints and prophets,	0
The patriarchs of yore.	0
They trod the toilsome journey	0
In patience and in faith;	0
And them I fain would follow,	0
Like them in life and death.	0
Who would share Abraham's blessing	0
Must Abraham's path pursue,	0
A stranger and a pilgrim,	0
Like him, must journey through.	0
The foes must be encountered,	0
The dangers must be passed;	0
A faithful soldier only	0
Receives the crown at last.	0
So I must hasten forward,-	0
Thank God, the end will come!	0
This land of passing shadows	0
Is not my destined home.	0
The everlasting city,	0
Jerusalem above,	0
This evermore abideth,	0
The home of light and love.	0
There still my thoughts are dwelling,	0
'Tis there I long to be;	0
Come, Lord, and call Thy servant	0
To blessedness with Thee.	0
Come, bid my toils be ended,	0
Let all my wanderings cease;	0
Call from the wayside lodging	0
To Thy sweet home of peace.	0
There I shall dwell forever,	0
No more a parting guest,	0
With all thy blood-bought children	0
In everlasting rest,	0
The pilgrim toils forgotten,	0
The pilgrim conflicts o'er,	0
All earthly griefs behind me,	0
Eternal joys before.	0

Oh, Lord,~ I Humbly come to you in Prayer,	0
For Those who need a special touch to know you care, Send an Angel~	0
with a blessing from above, sprinkle them with a portion of your love	0
There are Christians who are discouraged, broken hearts to often now are found.	0
So I'm praying to you, Jesus mend their broken hearts and keep them heaven bound.	0
Help me know Lord, when your are calling, lay a burden on my heart for those who need.	0
For I am willing to pray for others, for in my weakness, I know others pray for me.	0

Savior, Thou art life to me,	0
Guard me by Thy watchful eye;	0
Ever by Thy Spirit be	0
Thou a guide to worlds on high.	0
Hide me from the storms of life;	0
Keep me from the tempters snare;	0
And while here mid toil and strife,	0
Let me cast on Thee my care.	0
Help me, Lord, to faithful be,	0
Give me grace to do Thy will;	0
That through all eternity,	0
Holy love my soul may thrill.	0
For though blest by worldly store,	0
Sanctioned by the creeds of men;	0
Jesus says, I am the door,"	0
He alone can save from sin.	0
Teach me from Thy blessed Word	0
Lessons precious to my soul;	0
Help me understand it, Lord,	0
By it make and keep me whole.	0
By Thy Word we stand or fall,	0
By Thy Word we live or die;	0
If in part and not by all,	0
Then we make His word a lie.	0
Oh, Thou art my refuge here,	0
All my hopes are built on Thee;	0
From all sin and slavish fear	0
Jesus makes me fully free.	0
So when all my toils are oer,	0
Let me gain that blest abode;	0
And with loved ones gone before,	0
Ever dwell with me, my God.	0

Praise be to You, O Lord	0
God of our father Israel	0
From everlasting to everlasting	0
Yours, O Lord, is the greatness	0
And the power	0
And the glory	0
And the majesty	0
And the splendor	0
For everything in heaven and earth is Yours	0
Yours, O Lord, is the kingdom	0
You are exalted as head over all	0
Wealth and honor come from You	0
You are the ruler of all things	0
In Your hands are strength and power	0
To exalt and give strength to all	0
Now, our God, we give You thanks	0
And praise Your glorious name	0

A prophet-woman broke a jar	0
by Love's divine appointing.	0
With rare perfume she filled the room,	0
presiding and anointing.	0
A prophet-woman broke a jar,	0
the sneers of scorn defying.	0
With rare perfume she filled the room,	0
preparing Christ for dying.	0
A faithful woman left a tomb	0
by Love's divine commission.	0
She saw, she heard, she preached the word,	0
arising from submission.	0
A faithful woman left a tomb	0
with resurrection gospel.	0
She saw, she heard, she preached the word,	0
apostle to apostles.	0
Though woman-wisdom, woman-truth	0
for centuries were hidden,	0
unsung, unwritten, and unheard,	0
derided and forbidden,	0
the Spirit's breath, the Spirit's fire,	0
on free and slave, descending,	0
can tumble our diving walls,	0
our shame and sadness mending.	0
The Spirit knows, the Spirit calls,	0
by Love's divine ordaining,	0
the friends we need, to serve and lead,	0
their powers and gifts unchaining.	0
The Spirit knows, the Spirit calls	0
from women, men, and children	0
the friends we need, to serve and lead.	0
Rejoice and make them welcome!	0

Praise all ye Nations	0
Exalt Him on High	0
Praise all ye Nations	0
Exalt Him on High	0
Praise all ye Nations	0
Exalt Him on High	0
Praise all ye Nations	0
Exalt Him on High	0
North and south and east and all around the world	0
Every nation, every people, every language praise the Lord	0
Lift Him up on high	0

A pure heart, that's what I long for.	0
A heart that follows hard after Thee;	0
A pure heart, that's what I long for.	0
A heart that follows hard after Thee.	0
VERSE:	0
A heart that hides Your Word	0
So that sin will not come in.	0
A heart that's undivided	0
But one You rule and reign;	0
A heart that beats compassion,	0
That pleases You, my Lord.	0
A sweet aroma of worship	0
That rises to Your throne.	0

A purple robe, a crown of thorn,	0
A reed in His right hand;	0
Before the soldiers spite and scorn	0
I see my Savior stand.	0
He bears between the Roman guard	0
The weight of all our woe;	0
A stumbling figure, bowed and scarred,	0
I see my Savior go.	0
He hangs, by whom the world was made,	0
Beneath the darkened sky;	0
The everlasting ransom paid,	0
I see my Savior die.	0
He shares on high His Fathers throne,	0
Who once in mercy came;	0
For all His love to sinners shown	0
I sing my Saviors Name.	0

A rest remaineth for the weary;	0
Arise, sad heart, and grieve no more;	0
Though long the way, and dark and dreary,	0
It endeth on the golden shore.	0
Before His throne the Lamb will lead thee,	0
On heavnly pastures He will feed thee,	0
Cast off thy burden, come with haste;	0
Soon will the toil and strife be ended,	0
The weary way which thou hast wended.	0
Sweet is the rest which thou shalt taste.	0
The Fathers house has many a dwelling,	0
And there will be a place for thee.	0
With perfect love His heart is welling	0
Who loved thee from eternity.	0
His precious blood the Lamb hath given	0
That thou mightst share the joys of Heaven,	0
And now He calleth far and near:	0
Ye weary souls, cease your repining,	0
Come while for you My light is shining;	0
Come, sweetest rest awaits you here!"	0
O come, come all, ye weak and weary,	0
Ye souls bowed down with many a care;	0
Arise and leave your dungeons dreary	0
And listen to His promise fair:	0
Ye bore your burdens meek and lowly,	0
I will fulfill My pledge most holy,	0
Ill be your solace and your rest.	0
Ye are Mine own, I will requite you;	0
Though sin and Satan seek to smite you,	0
Rejoice! Your home is with the blest."	0
There rest and peace in endless measure	0
Shall be ours through eternity;	0
No grief, no care, shall mar our pleasure,	0
And untold bliss our lot shall be.	0
Oh, had we wings to hasten yonder	0
No more oer earthly ills to ponder	0
To join the glad, triumphant band!	0
Make haste, my soul, forget all sadness;	0
For peace awaits thee, joy and gladness	0
The perfect rest is nigh at hand.	0

I have peace like a river	0
Flowing through my soul	0
Flowing through my soul	0
Pouring over me	0
I have peace like a river	0
Flowing through my soul	0
Flowing through my soul and over me	0
I have love.	0
I have joy.	0
I have joy	0
Flowing through me	0
I have this joy of the Lord flowing through me	0
I have this sweet	0
Revelation	0
Of this joy of the Lord flowing through me	0

WHILE STROLLING THROUGH THE FIELDS OF TIME	0
THERE'S MANY THINGS TO SEE	0
BUT NATURE IS THE GREATEST SIGHT	0
THAT COULD EVER BE	0
THE GREATEST OF THEM ALL	0
IS HOW THE WORLD WAS FORMED	0
AND WHY A ROSE IS THERE TO LIVE	0
EACH DAY AMONG THE THORNS	0
ONE DAY AMONG THE WORLD OF THORNS	0
A ROSE BEGAN TO GROW	0
IT WAS THE GREATEST GIFT OF GOD	0
THIS WORLD WILL EVER KNOW	0
IT WAS THE WILL OF GOD TO SHOW	0
THAT SINCE THE WORLD WAS FORMED	0
THERE HAD TO BE A ROSE TO LIVE	0
AND DIE AMONG THE THORNS	0
TWO THOUSAND YEARS HAS SINCE BEEN GONE	0
SINCE GOD LOOKED DOWN WITH LOVE	0
HE FILLED THIS EARTH WITH BEAUTY	0
WITH ROSES FROM ABOVE	0
HE HUNG UPON A RUGGED CROSS	0
TO SAVE THE WORLD FROM SIN	0
BETWEEN TWO THORNS THIS ROSE HE DIED	0
THREE DAYS HE BLOOMED AGAIN	0
ONE DAY AMONG THE WORLD OF THORNS	0
A ROSE BEGAN TO GROW	0
IT WAS THE GREATEST GIFT OF GOD	0
THIS WORLD WILL EVER KNOW	0
IT WAS THE WILL OF GOD TO SHOW	0
THAT SINCE THE WORLD WAS FORMED	0
THERE HAD TO BE A ROSE TO LIVE	0
AND DIE AMONG THE THORNS	0

A safe stronghold our God is still,	0
a trusty shield and weapon;	0
he'll keep us clear from all the ill	0
that hath us now o'ertaken.	0
The ancient prince of hell	0
hath risen with purpose fell;	0
strong mail of craft and power	0
he weareth in this hour;	0
on earth is not his fellow.	0
With force of arms we nothing can,	0
full soon were we down-ridden;	0
but for us fights the proper Man,	0
whom God himself hath bidden.	0
Ask ye, who is this same?	0
Christ Jesus is his name,	0
the Lord Sabaoth's Son;	0
he, and no other one,	0
shall conquer in the battle.	0
And were this world all devils o'er,	0
and watching to devour us,	0
we lay it not to heart so sore;	0
nor they can overpower us.	0
And let the prince of ill	0
look grim as e'er he will,	0
he harms us not a whit;	0
for why?--his doom is writ;	0
a word shall quickly slay him.	0
God's word, for all their craft and force,	0
one moment will not linger,	0
but, spite of hell, shall have its course;	0
'tis	0
And though they take our life,	0
goods, honor, children, wife,	0
yet is their profit small;	0
these things shall vanish all:	0
the City of God remaineth!	0

A servants heart is what I need	0
To follow and obey	0
My pleasure is to live for You	0
To do just as You say	0
On the altar is my life	0
A sacrifice for You	0
I live and breathe each moment Lord	0
A willing slave for You	0
But Lord You know I stumble hard	0
I hear the voices all around	0
That mock and cause my heart to fear	0
Although Youre always near	0
A servant I will choose to be	0
Yet when Im weak Lord strengthen me	0
My eyes will never look behind	0
Ill cling to You for You are mine	0
My Master O, my Master	0
Im a sacrifice for You	0

A love like this	0
No one has ever loved me like this	0
Nothing and no one	0
Can explain this feeling	0
A touch like this	0
No one has ever touched me like this	0
I can feel You here	0
So deep down in my heart	0
But who am I?	0
A simple servant, I know I am!	0
Touching the garment of a King	0
The garment of Jesus	0
But who am I	0
That You will hear my song?	0
If angels praise You all day long	0
By Your shining throne in heaven	0

Theres a song in my heart that my lips cannot sing,	0
Tis praise in the highest to Jesus my King;	0
For I was a sinner, but Christ made me whole.	0
A sinner made whole! A sinner made whole!	0
The Savior has bought me and ransomed my soul!	0
My heart now is singing; theres joy in my soul,	0
For I was a sinner, but Christ made me whole.	0
I shall stand one day faultless and pure by His throne,	0
Transformed from my image, conformed to His own;	0
Then I shall find words for the song of my soul,	0
For I was a sinner, but Christ made me whole.	0
Will blend with my song just to make it complete,	0
Thro ages unending the echoes will roll,	0
For I was a sinner, but Christ made me whole.	0

O Jesus, O Redeemer,	0
With every breath, we want to exalt Thee.	0
O Son of God, Lord of Lords,	0
From our great sin, You have set us free.	0
God's only Son, our only hope.	0
Jesus will receive all of our praise.	0
Lamb of God, Almighty God,	0
We will give You the glory all of our days.	0
Your grace has brought me up from the deep	0
Your mercy, O Lord, has saved me from the flame.	0
I will worship you with all that have left inside me.	0
Your love has delivered me from myself.	0
Our salvation is nearer than it has ever been	0
Our salvation is nearer than it has ever been	0
My Jesus, my redeemer,	0
With my every breath, I will praise Your name.	0
My God and my Lord.	0
I was a sinner, but now I'll never be the same.	0

I was a slave to sin	0
I did not even know	0
Not only did He reveal the truth	0
But He made me his child	0
I am unlovable	0
I am as dirty rags	0
But when He looked at me	0
His arms were filled with love	0
He gave me new life	0
I am so thankful	0
The only thing I can give to Him	0
Is to serve Him all my life	0

A slave and captive now was I,	0
For I am dead in sin.	0
My lifes a waste; Im now alone,	0
Without a friend or kin.	0
What is this earth and sea so vast?	0
What secret Will hath made?	0
Whence now, poor wretch, have I come from?	0
God made me, without aid.	0
His mighty powr hath made all things;	0
With wisdom God abides.	0
Of his delights I fully know,	0
God governs and he guides.	0

Who is this that cometh from the wilderness,	0
Leaning on her well-beloveds arm,	0
Sweeter than the fragrant rose of Sharon,	0
Winning all our hearts by her charm?	0
Blessed bride of Christ, we now adore thee;	0
Treasure of our hearts, we hymn thy praise;	0
Church of God, we love thee and no other;	0
In thy courts well worship all our days.	0
Who is she that looketh as the morning,	0
Clearer than the moons celestial light,	0
Brighter than the suns effulgent glory,	0
Banishing the darkness of night?	0
Who is she that standeth on the mountain,	0
Singing to our hearts a song of joy,	0
Fairer than the lilies of the valley,	0
Pure as gold refined from alloy?	0
Who is she, the fairest of ten thousand,	0
Shining with the brightness of the sun,	0
Queen of love, and choice one of her mother?	0
She, my undefiled, is but one.	0

Like none eer heard before,	0
Come floating softly earthward	0
As thro Heavns open door:	0
It seems like angel voices,	0
In strains of joy and love,	0
That swell the mighty	0
Around the throne above.	0
Heard from a land afar	0
The song of Heavn and Homeland,	0
Thro doors God leaves ajar!	0
Now soft, and low, and restful,	0
It floods my soul with peace,	0
As if Gods benediction	0
Bade all earths troubles cease.	0
Then, grander than the voices	0
Of wind, and wave, and sea	0
It fills the dome of Heaven	0
With glorious harmony.	0
Like something heard in dreams	0
It seems to catch the cadence	0
Of heavnly winds and streams.	0
My heart is filled with rapture,	0
To think, some day to come,	0
Ill sing it with the angels	0
The song of Heavn and home.	0

The wondrous work the Lord has done	0
Let every voice proclaim!	0
And for the work of grace begun,	0
The wondrous battle fought and won,	0
Give glory to His Name!	0
We pleaded for the Spirit,	0
He came in mighty power;	0
We pleaded for the droppings,	0
And lo, He sent the shower!	0
Unto the Lord doth praise belong,	0
O tell it everywhere!	0
Let every ransomed soul prolong	0
The loud hosannah of the song	0
The Lord doth answer prayer!	0
Well sing the power of Jesus Name,	0
And His atoning blood;	0
Today and evermore the same,	0
The vilest sinner to reclaim,	0
And bring Him back to God.	0
Let every heart and every tongue	0
As one united host	0
Praise God for what His arm hath done	0
Praise God the Father, God the Son,	0
And God the Holy Ghost!	0

A song was heard at Christmas	0
to wake the midnight sky:	0
a Savior's birth, and peace on earth,	0
and praise to God on high.	0
The angels sang at Christmas	0
with all the hosts above,	0
and still we sing the newborn King,	0
his glory and his love.	0
A star was seen at Christmas,	0
a herald and a sign,	0
that men might know the way to go	0
to find the child divine.	0
The wise men watched at Christmas	0
in some far eastern land,	0
and still the wise in starry skies	0
discern their Maker's hand.	0
A tree was grown at Christmas,	0
a sapling green and young:	0
no tinsel bright with candlelight	0
upon its branches hung.	0
But he who came at Christmas	0
our sins and sorrows bore,	0
and still we name his tree of shame	0
our life for evermore.	0
A child was born at Christmas	0
when Christmas first began:	0
the Lord of all a baby small,	0
for love of men made man.	0
For love is ours at Christmas,	0
and life and light restored,	0
and so we praise through endless days	0
the Savior, Christ the Lord.	0

I want to be a soul winner for Jesus every day;	0
He does so much for me;	0
I want to aid the lost sinner to leave his erring way,	0
And be from bondage free.	0
A soul winner for Jesus,	0
A soul winner for Jesus,	0
Oh let me be each day;	0
A soul winner for Jesus,	0
A soul winner for Jesus,	0
He's done so much for me.	0
I want to be a soul winner and bring the lost to Christ	0
That they His grace may know;	0
I want to live for Christ ever, and do His blessed will	0
Because He loves me so.	0
A soul winner for Jesus,	0
A soul winner for Jesus,	0
Oh let me be each day;	0
A soul winner for Jesus,	0
A soul winner for Jesus,	0
He's done so much for me.	0
I want to be a soul winner till Jesus calls for me,	0
To lay my burdens down,	0
I want to hear Him say, "Servant, you've gathered many sheaves,	0
Receive a starry crown."	0
A soul winner for Jesus,	0
A soul winner for Jesus,	0
Oh let me be each day;	0
A soul winner for Jesus,	0
A soul winner for Jesus,	0
He's done so much for me.	0

A Spotless Rose is growing,	0
Sprung from a tender root,	0
Of ancient seers' foreshowing,	0
Of Jesse promised fruit;	0
Its fairest bud unfolds to light	0
Amid the cold, cold winter,	0
And in the dark midnight.	0
The Rose which I am singing,	0
Whereof Isaiah said,	0
Is from its sweet root springing	0
In Mary, purest Maid;	0
Through God's great love and might	0
The Blessed Babe she bare us	0
In a cold, cold winter's night.	0

I'm sure he must have been surprised at where this road had taken him	0
'Cause never in a million lives would he have dreamed of Bethlehem	0
And standing at the manger He saw with his own eyes	0
The message from the angel come to life and Joseph said	0
Why me, I'm just a simple man of trade	0
Why Him, with all the rulers in the world	0
Why here, inside this stable filled with hay	0
Why her, she's just an ordinary girl	0
Now I'm not one to second guess what angels have to say	0
But this is such a strange way to save the world	0
To think of how it could have been, if Jesus had come as He deserved	0
There would have been no Bethlehem No lowly shepherds at His birth	0
But Joseph knew the reason Love had to reach so far	0
And as he held the Savior in his arms, he must have thought.	0

A stranger once did bless the earth	0
who never caused a heart to mourn,	0
whose very voice gave sorrow mirth;	0
and how did earth his worth return?	0
it spurned him from its lowliest lot:	0
the meanest station owned him not.	0
An outcast thrown in sorrow's way,	0
a fugitive that knew no sin,	0
yet in lone places forced to stray;	0
men would not take the stranger in.	0
Yet peace, though much himself he mourned,	0
was all to others he returned.	0
His presence was a peace to all,	0
he bade the sorrowful rejoice.	0
Pain turned to pleasure at his call,	0
health lived and issued from his voice;	0
he healed the sick, and sent abroad	0
the dumb rejoicing in the Lord.	0
The blind met daylight in his eye,	0
the joys of everlasting day;	0
the sick found health in his reply,	0
the cripple threw his crutch away.	0
Yet he with troubles did remain,	0
and suffered poverty and pain.	0
It was for sin he suffered all	0
to set the world-imprisoned free,	0
to cheer the weary when they call;	0
and who could such a stranger be?	0
The God, who hears each human cry,	0
and came, a Saviour, from on high.	0

When we pass the golden summer,	0
And, like autumn leaves, retire	0
On the bosom of our mother,	0
Will our song of praise expire?	0
Oh, well sing a sweeter anthem,	0
With unnumbered millions there;	0
Glory, honor, and salvation,	0
In our home so bright and fair.	0
If our soul is blest in singing	0
In this feeble house of clay,	0
Who can tell the bliss of reigning	0
In our home of endless day?	0
Is it sweet to hymn the story,	0
Of salvation here below?	0
Oh, what anthems filled with glory	0
From the throne of God shall flow!	0
Do we love our dear Redeemer,	0
And rejoice that we are His?	0
We will love and praise Him better	0
When we see Him as He is.	0
Glory, glory be to Jesus!	0
Let us shout with joyful praise	0
To the Rock of our salvation	0
All this life and endless days.	0

Ill tell you a tale of the olden time,	0
While the yule log burns bright, and the church bells chime.	0
Gloria in excelsis Deo.	0
There sate a fair princess in joy on her throne,	0
And there in her arms her Infant was shown:	0
Gloria in excelsis, Gloria in excelsis	0
Gloria in excelsis Deo.	0
The beasts of the meadows bowed down their head	0
All under the moonlight so softly shed.	0
Gloria in excelsis Deo.	0
They worshipped the King of Creation there	0
In the arms of the mother so passing fair.	0
Gloria in excelsis, Gloria in excelsis	0
Gloria in excelsis Deo.	0
O who are these masters of ancient mould?	0
O these are the shepherds, the lords of the fold;	0
Gloria in excelsis Deo.	0
They have heard from the sky of the birth of their King,	0
They have heard all the sky with the harmony ring.	0
Gloria in excelsis, Gloria in excelsis	0
Gloria in excelsis Deo.	0
The kings of the east in number three,	0
All worship the Monarch of high degree;	0
Gloria in excelsis Deo.	0
Their tribute they offer, their heads they bow,	0
And clearer and clearer is echoing now,	0
Gloria in excelsis, Gloria in excelsis	0
Gloria in excelsis Deo.	0
For all the zenith is blazing with light,	0
Gloria in excelsis Deo.	0
O this is the carol of peace and goodwill	0
From the voices celestial, the zenith that fill;	0
Gloria in excelsis, Gloria in excelsis	0
Gloria in excelsis Deo.	0

We light a thousand candles bright, around the earth today,	0
And all the beams will shine across the heaven's grand display.	0
Yes, over land and sea tonight the joyful message brings	0
The birth of Him, our Lord and Christ, our Savior and our King.	0
Dear brightest star o'er Bethlehem, O let your precious light	0
Shine in with hope and peace toward men in ev'ry home tonight.	0
In all our house so cold and dark, please send your warmth sublime,	0
The warmth that comes from Jesus' love this blessed Christmas time.	0

Wonderful Counselor,	0
King of Incense and Myrrh,	0
Eternal Father,	0
Sin's Lone Forsaker,	0
Prince of Glorious Peace,	0
Comforter of No Decrease,	0
Season of no comply	0
Reason for my every why	0
You're the God of a thousand names	0
For none can fully proclaim	0
All You've done for me	0
All You've done for me	0
Maker, the Lord Most High,	0
Painter of the Sunset Sky	0
Loving Befriender,	0
Watching Defender,	0
Shadow at noontime sun	0
Morning star when the light is gone	0
Mover of Mountains	0
Spring of all Fountains	0

A thousand years have come and gone, and near a thousand more,	0
Since happier light from heaven shone than ever shone before:	0
And in the hearts of old and young a joy most joyful stirred.	0
That sent such news from tongue to tongue as ears had never heard.	0
Then angels on their starry way felt bliss unfelt before,	0
For news that men should be as they to darkened earth they bore;	0
So toiling men and spirits bright a first communion had,	0
And in meek mercys rising light were each exceeding glad.	0
And we are glad, and we will sing, as in the days of yore;	0
Come all, and hearts made ready bring, to welcome back once more	0
The day when first on wintry earth a summer change began,	0
And, dawning in a lowly birth uprose the Light of man.	0
For trouble such as men must bear from childhood to fourscore,	0
He shared with us, that we might share His joy forevermore;	0
And twice a thousand years of grief of conflict, and of sin,	0
May tell how large the harvest sheaf His patient love shall win.	0

A promise spoken in the beginning	0
A prophet's words in the night	0
An angel's message to a young lady	0
A brilliant star in the sky	0
Who would be coming?	0
How were they knowing?	0
What's it all about?	0
Why was He coming?	0
Where was He going?	0
When will they all find out?	0
A tiny child !	0
Almighty God !	0
A tiny child!	0
An almighty God!	0
A lonely village, a lowly carpenter	0
No proper shelter in sight	0
Their room a stable, manger a cradle	0
Angelic hosts on high	0
A little baby boy, the hope of peace and joy	0
A tiny beacon of light	0
Divine creator becomes creation	0
His holy promise of life	0
He came to people, born of the people	0
So that the people could be free	0
He lived with people, He blessed the people	0
The people nailed Him to a tree	0
A tiny child !	0
Almighty God !	0
A tiny child!	0
An almighty God !	0
A tiny child !	0
Almighty God !	0
A tiny child !	0
Almighty, almighty God	0

Ain't there trouble around us?	0
Oh yes there's trouble around us	0
And ain't there hatred about us?	0
You know there's hatred about us	0
But don't you know that it's a very special time to be living in this world	0
It's a very special hour to be alive	0
'Cause my Jesus Christ gave in to the cross of Calvary	0
And He's reigning now, it's so great to be alive	0
Ain't there confusion about us?	0
Yes there's confusion about us	0
And ain't there temptation around us?	0
You know there's temptation around us	0
But let me tell you it's a very special time to be living in this world	0
It's a very special hour to be alive	0
'Cause my Jesus Christ gives me hope and the strength with which to cope	0
With the world so bad, it's so great to be alive	0
It's so great to be alive!	0
It's so wonderful to understand	0
That no matter where the world goes	0
My destiny is in His hands	0
But ain't our world now in trouble?	0
You know our world is in trouble	0
And don't the world need a Savior	0
We need to show them the Savior	0
But don't you know that it's a very special time to be living in this world	0
It's a very special hour to be alive	0
'Cause my Jesus won't forget that He promised to return	0
And He's coming soon, it's so great to be alive!	0
Yes He's coming soon, it's so great to be alive!	0

A Virgin most pure, as the prophets do tell,	0
Hath brought forth a baby, as it hath befell,	0
To be our Redeemer from death, hell, and sin,	0
Which Adam's transgression hath wrapped us in:	0
Aye and therefore be merry,	0
rejoice and be you merry,	0
Set sorrows aside;	0
Christ Jesus our Saviour	0
was born on this tide.	0
At Bethlem in Jewry a city there was,	0
Where Joseph and Mary together did pass,	0
And there to be taxed with many one mo',	0
For Caesar commanded the same should be so:	0
But when they had entered the city so fair,	0
A number of people so mighty was there,	0
That Joseph and Mary, whose substance was small,	0
Could find in the inn there no lodging at all:	0
Then they were constrained in a stable to lie,	0
Where horses and asses they used for to tie;	0
Their lodging so simple the took it no scorn,	0
But against the next morning our Saviour was born:	0
The King of all kings to this world being brought,	0
Small store of fine linen to wrap him was sought;	0
And when she had swaddled her young son so sweet,	0
Within an ox-manger she laid him to sleep:	0
Then God sent an angel from heaven so high,	0
To certain poor shepherds in fields where they lie,	0
And bade them no longer in sorrow to stay,	0
Because that our Saviour was born on this day:	0
Then presently after the shepherds did spy	0
A number of angels that stood in the sky;	0
They joyfully talked, and sweetly did sing,	0
To God be all glory, our heavenly King:	0

I hear a voice callin'	0
it must be our Lord	0
Its coming from heaven on high.	0
I hear a voice callin'	0
I've gained a reward	0
for the land where we never shall die.	0
The saviour who di.ed, on cruel calvary	0
he shed his life blood that the world might be free.	0
So follow his footsteps, up the narrow way.	0
and be ready to meet him when calls on that day.	0

The saviour has paid a great price for me	0
He gave his life on calvary.	0
so follow his footsteps,up the narrow way.	0
that'll pay my debt on the great judgement day.	0

Jesus loves me this I know	0
For the Bible tells me so	0
Little ones to Him belong	0
They are week, but He is strong	0
Yes, Jesus loves me	0
Yes, Jesus loves me	0
Yes, Jesus loves me	0
The Bible tells me so	0
In the quiet of the hour	0
A small voice dares to be heard	0
And though the voice is soft, the tones are hushed	0
You know the King of kings is stirred	0
A voice of praise will be the song we raise	0
A voice of praise to our King	0
A voice of praise lives on eternally	0
So let the heavens ring with a voice of praise	0
So hush, the angels listen in	0
As voices start to blend in love	0
For as the grows, the praises swell	0
And spirits soar to heaven above	0
La, la la la la la	0
La la la, la la la la la	0
La la la la la, la la la la la	0
La la la, la la la la la	0
La la la la la, la la la la la la la	0
La la la, la la	0
For the joy to know He listens now	0
As praises to His feet now fly	0
Angel wings, they beat the time	0
As all creation starts to sing	0
A voice of praise, a voice of praise, a voice of praise	0

A wedding took place in the village of Cana,	0
And Jesus, His mother, and followers all came.	0
The wine was exhausted, and Mary informed Him,	0
They have no more wine"this would surely bring shame.	0
Dear woman," He answered, why do you involve Me?	0
My time to be recognized has not yet come."	0
His mother then said to the servants there waiting,	0
Whatever He tells you, now let it be done."	0
Six water jars stood there for ritual washing,	0
Each holding then full twenty gallons or more.	0
He said to the servants, Now fill them with water."	0
They filled them brimful; there was no room for more.	0
Then Jesus instructed, Take some to the master."	0
The water had turned into winenone knew how.	0
On tasting, the master exclaimed in amazement,	0
The choicest and best wine youve saved until now!"	0
When Jesus turned water to wine there in Cana,	0
This was the first miracle Hed ever done.	0
His glory He thus did reveal to the people,	0
And as a result, His disciples were won.	0
Lord, may I be like them, believing You fully.	0
And like the stone water jars, may I eer be,	0
Filled up to the brim with Your transforming Spirit.	0
Reveal now Your glory to others through me.	0

I can show you the world	0
Shining, shimmering, splendid	0
Tell me princess, now when did	0
You last let your heart decide?	0
I can open your eyes	0
Take you wonder by wonder	0
Over, sideways and under	0
On a magic carpet ride	0
A whole new world	0
A new fantastic point of view	0
No one to tell us no	0
Or where to go	0
Or say we're only dreaming	0
A whole new world	0
A dazzling place I never knew	0
But when I'm way up here	0
It's crystal clear	0
That now I'm in a whole new world with you	0
Unbelievable sights	0
Indescribable feelings	0
Soaring, tumbling, freewheeling	0
Through an endless diamond sky	0
A whole new world	0
A hundred thousand things to see	0
I'm like a shooting star	0
I've come so far	0
I can't go back to where I used to be	0
A whole new world	0
With new horizons to pursue	0
I'll chase them anywhere	0
There's time to spare	0
Let me share this whole new world with you	0
I can show you the world and share it with you	0
A whole new world	0
New fantastic point of view	0
No one to tell us no	0
Or where to go	0
Or say we're only dreaming	0
A whole new world	0
With new horizons to pursue	0
I'll chase them anywhere	0
There's time to spare	0
Anywhere, there's time to spare	0
Let me share this whole new world with you	0
A whole new world	0
That's where we'll be	0
A thrilling place	0
A wondrous place	0
For you and me	0

A wife of noble character,	0
Is guerdon from the hand of God.	0
She works all day with eager hands,	0
Invests herself in every job.	0
She is not proud but full of love	0
And helps the hungry and the weak.	0
Her husband has full faith in her;	0
Of her, her children highly speak.	0
She speaks with wisdom, faith, and love,	0
And faithfulness receives reward	0
The gilt of beauty fades away,	0
But praised is she who fears the Lord.	0

A wonderful Savior is Jesus my Lord,	0
A wonderful Savior to me;	0
He hideth my soul in the cleft of the rock,	0
Where rivers of pleasure I see.	0
He hideth my soul in the cleft of the rock	0
That shadows a dry, thirsty land;	0
He hideth my life in the depths of His love,	0
And covers me there with His hand,	0
And covers me there with His hand.	0
A wonderful Savior is Jesus my Lord,	0
He taketh my burden away;	0
He holdeth me up and I shall not be moved,	0
He giveth me strength as my day.	0
When clothed in His brightness, transported I rise	0
To meet Him in clouds of the sky,	0
His perfect salvation, His wonderful love,	0
I'll shout with the millions on high.	0

Everybody's gonna have religion in glory	0
Everybody's gonna be a-singin' that story	0
Everybody's gonna have a wonderful time up there	0
Well, Everybody's gonna have religion in glory	0
Everybody's gonna be a-singin' that story	0
Everybody's gonna have a wonderful time up there	0
Oh, glory hallelujah	0
Brother there's a reckon and a comin' in the mornin'	0
And ya better get ya ready cause I'm givin' you the warnin'	0
Everybody's gonna have a wonderful time up there	0
Now listen everybody, 'cause I'm talkin' to you	0
The Lord is the only one to carry you through	0
Better get ready 'cause I'm tellin' you why	0
The Lord is a-comin' from his throne on high	0
Readin' in the Bible 'bout the things he said	0
He said he's comin' back again to raise the dead	0
How ya gonna feel about the things you'll say	0
On that judgment day?	0
Readin' in the Bible, in the back of the book	0
The book of Revelation is the place to look	0
You can understand it, yes you can if you try	0
The Lord is comin' from his throne on high	0
Goin' down the valley, goin' one by one	0
Gonna be rewarded for the things we've done	0
How you gonna feel about the chosen few?	0
Will you make it through?	0
Brother there's a reckon and a comin' in the mornin'	0
Better get ya ready cause I'm givin' you the warnin'	0
Everybody's gonna have a wonderful time	0
Everybody's gonna have a wonderful time	0
Everybody's gonna have a wonderful time up there	0

A world of evil, whole course on fire!	0
On fire	0
On fire	0
A small spark, course on fire	0
On fire	0
A small spark, course on fire	0
So many animals, birds of the air, and the fish in the sea	0
We have been able to bring them all under control	0
Out of the mouth we hear praising and cursing, and this shouldn't be	0
Funny we're not as successful in guiding our souls	0
Though it's small, the tongue has power, more than you know	0
Like a rudder pilots where you go	0
We submit to restless evil, full knowing well	0
It's poisonous and set on fire by hell	0
Though it's a spark	0
Sets it on fire	0
Though it's a spark	0
Sets it on fire	0
Speaking before we are thinking, so careless with all that we say	0
Making remarks when we fail to consider the reason	0
We often react without knowin' the facts, and our tongues won't obey	0
Bein' corrupted with words that are full of the poison	0
Knowing better we should be not be down in the mire	0
Course directed by the burning fire	0
Since the time we learn to talk, we're never the same	0
Full of power that we cannot tame	0
Though it's a spark	0
Sets it on fire	0
Though it's a spark	0
Sets it on fire	0
Don't be feelin' helpless, strugglin' all alone	0
He will help us overcome this sin	0
Now you should remember you are not your own	0
Claim a victory through our precious Friend	0
Through our precious Friend	0
A small spark	0
Course on fire	0
A world of evil	0
Whole course on fire	0
Though it's a spark	0
Sets it on fire	0

I was once a sinner, but I came	0
Pardon to receive from my Lord:	0
This was freely given, and I found	0
That He always kept His word.	0
Theres a new name written down in glory,	0
And its mine, O yes, its mine!	0
And the white robed angels sing the story,	0
A sinner has come home."	0
For theres a new name written down in glory,	0
And its mine, O yes, its mine!	0
With my sins forgiven I am bound for heaven,	0
Never more to roam.	0
I was humbly kneeling at the cross,	0
Fearing naught by Gods angry frown;	0
When the heavens opened and I saw	0
That my name was written down.	0
Theres a new name written down in glory,	0
And its mine, O yes, its mine!	0
And the white robed angels sing the story,	0
A sinner has come home."	0
For theres a new name written down in glory,	0
And its mine, O yes, its mine!	0
With my sins forgiven I am bound for heaven,	0
Never more to roam.	0
In the Book tis written, Saved by Grace,"	0
O the joy that came to my soul!	0
Now I am forgiven, and I know	0
By the blood I am made whole.	0
Theres a new name written down in glory,	0
And its mine, O yes, its mine!	0
And the white robed angels sing the story,	0
A sinner has come home."	0
For theres a new name written down in glory,	0
And its mine, O yes, its mine!	0
With my sins forgiven I am bound for heaven,	0
Never more to roam.	0

I'm feeling like the eagle that rises	0
Flies above the earth and it's troubles	0
Oh yes it knows that there are valleys below	0
But under his wings there's a stronger power	0
Oh Father-You are my strength	0
On you I wait upon	0
You make the road rise up to meet me	0
You make the sunshine warm upon my face	0
The wind is at my back & the rain falls soft	0
God I lift you high-You are my Abba	0
Running in this race to the finish line	0
The only road for me is the narrow	0
Not gonna stop or even look to the side	0
When I fix my eyes upon You Jesus	0
Oh Father -You are my strength	0
Now more than ever	0
When you've run too far-and the road is long	0
Can't walk another mile-He is waiting	0
Hope in Him again-He'll renew you	0
Then you will rise, gather up your wings and fly.	0

In Jesus we come to You.	0
In our hearts Your Spirit moves.	0
We Your little children	0
Come in adoration.	0
Abba Father	0
Draw me nearer	0

Hold me closer	0
Abba Father	0
Abba Father	0
Draw me nearer	0

Hold me closer	0
Abba Father	0
Just sitting here at your feet,	0
Quite contented just to be	0
Resting in your presence,	0
Safe, secure, protected.	0

Abba, Father!" We approach Thee	0
In our Saviors precious Name;	0
We, Thy children, here assembled,	0
Now Thy promised blessing claim;	0
From our sins His blood hath washed us,	0
Tis through Him our souls draw nigh,	0
And Thy Spirit, too, hath taught us,	0
Abba, Father," thus to cry.	0
Once as prodigals we wandered	0
In our folly far from Thee,	0
But Thy grace, oer sin abounding,	0
Rescued us from misery;	0
Thou Thy prodigals hast pardoned,	0
Kissed us with a Fathers love,	0
Spread the festive board, and called us,	0
Eer to dwell with Thee above.	0
Clothed in garments of salvation,	0
At Thy table is our place,	0
We rejoice, and Thou rejoicest,	0
In the riches of Thy grace;	0
It is meet," we hear Thee saying,	0
We should merry and be glad,	0
I have found My once lost children,	0
Now they live who once were dead."	0
Abba, Father!" all adore Thee,	0
All rejoice in Heavn above,	0
While in us they learn the wonders	0
Of Thy wisdom, grace, and love;	0
Soon before Thy throne assembled,	0
All Thy children shall proclaim,	0
Glory, everlasting glory,	0
Be to God and to the Lamb!"	0

O Abba, Father, Lord of Life,	0
What choice can curb your will?	0
Though men may plot their seprate course,	0
Each step obeys you still.	0
O Mighty God and Upright Judge,	0
Who keeps their death at bay?	0
Men whitewash tombs and flee in vain	0
Your throne and judgment day.	0
O Wondrous King of majesty	0
Who sees your holy place?	0
The west would fold upon the east	0
To glimpse your shining face.	0
O Counslor, Christ; Love sacrificed,	0
My joy, my goal, my aim,	0
What flesh or foil can claim or spoil	0
Your holy, righteous name.	0

Abba O Abba Father	0
You are the potter	0
And we are the clay,	0
The work of your hands	0
Mould us mould us and	0
Fashion us,	0
Into the image,	0
Of Jesus your Son	0
Of Jesus your Son.	0
Father, may we be one in you,	0
May we be one in you,	0
As he is in you,	0
And you are in him	0
Glory, glory and praise to thee	0
Glory and praise to thee	0
Forever amen.	0
Forever amen.	0
Forever amen.	0

Abide in me, O Lord, and I in Thee,	0
From this good hour, oh, leave me nevermore;	0
Then shall the discord cease, the wound be healed,	0
The lifelong bleeding of the soul be oer.	0
Abide in me; oershadow by Thy love	0
Each half formed purpose and dark thought of sin;	0
Quench ere it rise each selfish, low desire,	0
And keep my soul as Thine, calm and divine.	0
As some rare perfume in a vase of clay,	0
Pervades it with a fragrance not its own,	0
So, when Thou dwellest in a mortal soul,	0
All Heavens own sweetness seems around it thrown.	0
Abide in me; there have been moments blest	0
When I have heard Thy voice and felt Thy power;	0
Then evil lost its grasp; and passion, hushed,	0
Owned the divine enchantment of the hour.	0
These were but seasons beautiful and rare;	0
Abide in me, and they shall ever be;	0
Fulfill at once Thy precept and my prayer,	0
Come, and abide in me, and I in Thee.	0

Abide in Thee, in that deep love of Thine,	0
My Jesus, Lord, Thou Lamb of God divine;	0
Down, closely down, as living branch with tree,	0
I would abide, my Lord, my Christ, in Thee.	0
Abide in Thee, my Savior, God, I know	0
How love of Thine, so vast, in me may flow:	0
My empty vessel running oer with joy,	0
Now overflows to Thee without alloy.	0
Abide in Thee, nor doubt, nor self, nor sin,	0
Can eer prevail with Thy blest life within;	0
Joined to Thyself, communing deep, my soul	0
Knows naught besides its motions to control.	0
Abide in Thee, tis thus alone I know	0
The secrets of Thy mind een while below;	0
All joy and peace, and knowledge of Thy Word,	0
All power and fruit, and service for the Lord.	0

Abide not in the realm of dreams,	0
O man, however fair it seems;	0
But with clear eye the present scan,	0
And hear the call of God and man.	0
Think not in sleep to fold thy hands,	0
Forgetful of thy Lords commands;	0
From dutys claims no life is free,	0
Behold, today hath need of thee.	0
The present hour allots thy task,	0
For present strength and patience ask;	0
And trust His love Whose sure supply	0
Meets all thy need abundantly.	0

Abide, O dearest Jesus,	0
Among us with Thy grace,	0
That Satan may not harm us,	0
Nor we to sin give place.	0
Abide, O dear Redeemer,	0
Among us with Thy Word,	0
And thus now and hereafter	0
True peace and joy afford.	0
Abide with heavnly brightness	0
Among us, precious Light;	0
Thy truth direct, and keep us	0
From errors gloomy night.	0
Abide with richest blessings	0
Among us, bounteous Lord;	0
Let us in grace and wisdom	0
Grow daily through Thy Word.	0
Abide with Thy protection	0
Among us, Lord, our Strength,	0
Lest world and Satan fell us	0
And overcome at length.	0
Abide, O faithful Savior,	0
Among us with Thy love;	0
Grant steadfastness, and help us	0
To reach our home above.	0

Abide with me, tis eventide!	0
The day is past and gone;	0
The shadows of the evening fall;	0
The night is coming on!	0
Within my heart a welcome Guest,	0
Within my home abide.	0
O Savior, stay this night with me;	0
Behold, tis eventide!	0
O Savior, stay this night with me;	0
Behold, tis eventide!	0
Abide with me, tis eventide!	0
Thy walk today with me	0
Has made my heart within me burn,	0
As I communed with Thee.	0
Thy earnest words have filled my soul	0
And kept me near Thy side.	0
Abide with me, tis eventide!	0
And lone will be the night,	0
If I cannot commune with Thee,	0
Nor find in Thee my light.	0
The darkness of the world, I fear,	0
Would in my home abide.